
CHAPTER SIX

The Princess Nausicaa.--The Washing.--The Game with the Ball.--The Court
of Phaeacia and King Alcinous.


Meantime Minerva, designing an interview between the king's daughter of
that country and Ulysses when he should awake, went by night to the palace
of king Alcinous, and stood at the bedside of the princess Nausicaa in the
shape of one of her favourite attendants, and thus addressed the sleeping
princess:

"Nausicaa, why do you lie sleeping here, and never bestow a thought upon
your bridal ornaments, of which you have many and beautiful, laid up in
your wardrobe against the day of your marriage, which cannot be far
distant; when you shall have need of all, not only to deck your own
person, but to give away in presents to the virgins that honouring you
shall attend you to the temple? Your reputation stands much upon the
timely care of these things; these things are they which fill father and
reverend mother with delight. Let us arise betimes to wash your fair
vestments of linen and silks in the river; and request your sire to lend
you mules and a coach, for your wardrobe is heavy, and the place where we
must wash is distant, and besides it fits not a great princess like you to
go so far on foot."

So saying, she went away, and Nausicaa awoke, full of pleasing thoughts of
her marriage, which the dream had told her was not far distant; and as
soon as it was dawn she arose and dressed herself, and went to find her
parents.

The queen her mother was already up, and seated among her maids, spinning
at her wheel, as the fashion was in those primitive times, when great
ladies did not disdain housewifery: and the king her father was preparing
to go abroad at that early hour to council with his grave senate.

"My father," she said, "will you not order mules and a coach to be got
ready, that I may go and wash, I and my maids, at the cisterns that stand
without the city?"

"What washing does my daughter speak of?" said Alcinous.

"Mine and my brothers' garments," she replied, "that have contracted soil
by this time with lying by so long in the wardrobe. Five sons have you
that are my brothers; two of them are married, and three are bachelors;
these last it concerns to have their garments neat and unsoiled; it may
advance their fortunes in marriage: and who but I their sister should have
a care of these things? You yourself, my father, have need of the whitest
apparel when you go, as now, to the council."

She used this plea, modestly dissembling her care of her own nuptials to
her father; who was not displeased at this instance of his daughter's
discretion; for a seasonable care about marriage may be permitted to a
young maiden, provided it be accompanied with modesty and dutiful
submission to her parents in the choice of her future husband; and there
was no fear of Nausicaa choosing wrongly or improperly, for she was as
wise as she was beautiful, and the best in all Phaeacia were suitors to
her for her love. So Alcinous readily gave consent that she should go,
ordering mules and a coach to be prepared. And Nausicaa brought from her
chamber all her vestments, and laid them up in the coach, and her mother
placed bread and wine in the coach, and oil in a golden cruse, to soften
the bright skins of Nausicaa and her maids when they came out of the
river.

Nausicaa, making her maids get up into the coach with her, lashed the
mules, till they brought her to the cisterns which stood a little on the
outside of the town, and were supplied with water from the river Callicoe.

There her attendants unyoked the mules, took out the clothes, and steeped
them in the cisterns, washing them in several waters, and afterwards
treading them clean with their feet, venturing wagers who should have done
soonest and cleanest, and using many pretty pastimes to beguile their
labours as young maids use, while the princess looked on. When they had
laid their clothes to dry, they fell to playing again, and Nausicaa joined
them in a game with the ball, which is used in that country, which is
performed by tossing the ball from hand to hand with great expedition, she
who begins the pastime singing a song. It chanced that the princess, whose
turn it became to toss the ball, sent it so far from its mark that it fell
beyond into one of the cisterns of the river; at which the whole company,
in merry consternation, set up a shriek so loud as waked the sleeping
Ulysses, who was taking his rest after his long toils in the woods not far
distant from the place where these young maids had come to wash.

[Illustration: _And Nausicaa joined them in a game with the ball_.]

At the sound of female voices Ulysses crept forth from his retirement,
making himself a covering with boughs and leaves as well as he could to
shroud his nakedness. The sudden appearance of his weather-beaten and
almost naked form so frighted the maidens that they scudded away into the
woods and all about to hide themselves, only Minerva (who had brought
about this interview to admirable purposes, by seemingly accidental means)
put courage into the breast of Nausicaa, and she stayed where she was, and
resolved to know what manner of man he was, and what was the occasion of
his strange coming to them.

He not venturing (for delicacy) to approach and clasp her knees, as
suppliants should, but standing far off, addressed this speech to the
young princess:

"Before I presume rudely to press my petitions, I should first ask whether
I am addressing a mortal woman, or one of the goddesses. If a goddess, you
seem to me to be likest to Diana, the chaste huntress, the daughter of
Jove. Like hers are your lineaments, your stature, your features, and air
divine."

She making answer that she was no goddess, but a mortal maid, he
continued:

"If a woman, thrice blessed are both the authors of your birth, thrice
blessed are your brothers, who even to rapture must have joy in your
perfections, to see you grown so like a young tree, and so graceful. But
most blessed of all that breathe is he that has the gift to engage your
young neck in the yoke of marriage. I never saw that man that was worthy
of you. I never saw man or woman that at all parts equalled you. Lately at
Delos (where I touched) I saw a young palm which grew beside Apollo's
temple; it exceeded all the trees which ever I beheld for straightness and
beauty: I can compare you only to that. A stupor past admiration strikes
me, joined with fear, which keeps me back from approaching you, to embrace
your knees. Nor is it strange; for one of freshest and firmest spirit
would falter, approaching near to so bright an object: but I am one whom a
cruel habit of calamity has prepared to receive strong impressions. Twenty
days the unrelenting seas have tossed me up and down coming from Ogygia,
and at length cast me shipwrecked last night upon your coast. I have seen
no man or woman since I landed but yourself. All that I crave is clothes,
which you may spare me, and to be shown the way to some neighbouring town.
The gods, who have care of strangers, will requite you for these
courtesies."

She, admiring to hear such complimentary words proceed out of the mouth of
one whose outside looked so rough and unpromising, made answer: "Stranger,
I discern neither sloth nor folly in you, and yet I see that you are poor
and wretched: from which I gather that neither wisdom nor industry can
secure felicity; only Jove bestows it upon whomsoever he pleases. He
perhaps has reduced you to this plight. However, since your wanderings
have brought you so near to our city, it lies in our duty to supply your
wants. Clothes and what else a human hand should give to one so suppliant,
and so tamed with calamity, you shall not want. We will show you our city
and tell you the name of our people. This is the land of the Phaeacians,
of which my father, Alcinous, is king."

Then calling her attendants, who had dispersed on the first sight of
Ulysses, she rebuked them for their fear, and said: "This man is no
Cyclop, nor monster of sea or land, that you should fear him; but he seems
manly, staid, and discreet, and though decayed in his outward appearance,
yet he has the mind's riches, wit and fortitude, in abundance. Show him
the cisterns, where he may wash him from the sea-weeds and foam that hang
about him, and let him have garments that fit him out of those which we
have brought with us to the cisterns."

Ulysses, retiring a little out of sight, cleansed him in the cisterns from
the soil and impurities with which the rocks and waves had covered all his
body, and clothing himself with befitting raiment, which the princess's
attendants had given him, he presented himself in more worthy shape to
Nausicaa. She admired to see what a comely personage he was, now he was
dressed in all parts; she thought him some king or hero: and secretly
wished that the gods would be pleased to give her such a husband.

Then causing her attendants to yoke her mules, and lay up the vestments,
which the sun's heat had sufficiently dried, in the coach, she ascended
with her maids and drove off to the palace, bidding Ulysses, as she
departed, keep an eye upon the coach, and to follow it on foot at some
distance: which she did, because if she had suffered him to have rode in
the coach with her, it might have subjected her to some misconstructions
of the common people, who are always ready to vilify and censure their
betters, and to suspect that charity is not always pure charity, but that
love or some sinister intention lies hid under its disguise. So discreet
and attentive to appearance in all her actions was this admirable
princess.

Ulysses as he entered the city wondered to see its magnificence, its
markets, buildings, temples; its walls and rampires; its trade, and resort
of men; its harbours for shipping, which is the strength of the Phaeacian
state. But when he approached the palace, and beheld its riches, the
proportion of its architecture, its avenues, gardens, statues, fountains,
he stood rapt in admiration, and almost forgot his own condition in
surveying the flourishing estate of others; but recollecting himself, he
passed on boldly into the inner apartment, where the king and queen were
sitting at dinner with their peers, Nausicaa having prepared them for his
approach.

To them humbly kneeling, he made it his request that, since fortune had
cast him naked upon their shores, they would take him into their
protection, and grant him a conveyance by one of the ships of which their
great Phaeacian state had such good store, to carry him to his own
country. Having delivered his request, to grace it with more humility he
went and sat himself down upon the hearth among the ashes, as the custom
was in those days when any would make a petition to the throne.

He seemed a petitioner of so great state and of so superior a deportment
that Alcinous himself arose to do him honour, and causing him to leave
that abject station which he had assumed, placed him next to his throne,
upon a chair of state, and thus he spake to his peers:

"Lords and councillors of Phaeacia, ye see this man, who he is we know
not, that is come to us in the guise of a petitioner: he seems no mean
one; but whoever he is, it is fit, since the gods have cast him upon our
protection, that we grant him the rites of hospitality while he stays with
us, and at his departure a ship well manned to convey so worthy a
personage as he seems to be, in a manner suitable to his rank, to his own
country."

This counsel the peers with one consent approved; and wine and meat being
set before Ulysses, he ate and drank, and gave the gods thanks who had
stirred up the royal bounty of Alcinous to aid him in that extremity. But
not as yet did he reveal to the king and queen who he was, or whence he
had come; only in brief terms he related his being cast upon their shores,
his sleep in the woods, and his meeting with the princess Nausicaa, whose
generosity, mingled with discretion, filled her parents with delight, as
Ulysses in eloquent phrases adorned and commended her virtues. But
Alcinous, humanely considering that the troubles which his guest had
undergone required rest, as well as refreshment by food, dismissed him
early in the evening to his chamber; where in a magnificent apartment
Ulysses found a smoother bed, but not a sounder repose, than he had
enjoyed the night before, sleeping upon leaves which he had scraped
together in his necessity.




CHAPTER SEVEN

The Songs of Demodocus.--The Convoy Home.--The Mariners Transformed to
Stone.--The Young Shepherd.


When it was daylight, Alcinous caused it to be proclaimed by the heralds
about the town that there was come to the palace a stranger, shipwrecked
on their coast, that in mien and person resembled a god; and inviting all
the chief people of the city to come and do honour to the stranger.

The palace was quickly filled with guests, old and young, for whose cheer,
and to grace Ulysses more, Alcinous made a kingly feast with banquetings
and music. Then, Ulysses being seated at a table next the king and queen,
in all men's view, after they had feasted Alcinous ordered Demodocus, the
court-singer, to be called to sing some song of the deeds of heroes, to
charm the ear of his guest. Demodocus came and reached his harp, where it
hung between two pillars of silver; and then the blind singer, to whom, in
recompense of his lost sight, the muses had given an inward discernment, a
soul and a voice to excite the hearts of men and gods to delight, began in
grave and solemn strains to sing the glories of men highliest famed. He
chose a poem whose subject was The Stern Strife stirred up between Ulysses
and Great Achilles, as at a banquet sacred to the gods, in dreadful
language, they expressed their difference; while Agamemnon sat rejoiced in
soul to hear those Grecians jar; for the oracle in Pytho had told him that
the period of their wars in Troy should then be, when the kings of Greece,
anxious to arrive at the wished conclusion, should fall to strife, and
contend which must end the war, force or stratagem.

This brave contention he expressed so to the life, in the very words which
they both used in the quarrel, as brought tears into the eyes of Ulysses
at the remembrance of past passages of his life, and he held his large
purple weed before his face to conceal it. Then craving a cup of wine, he
poured it out in secret libation to the gods, who had put into the mind of
Demodocus unknowingly to do him so much honour. But when the moving poet
began to tell of other occurrences where Ulysses had been present, the
memory of his brave followers who had been with him in all difficulties,
now swallowed up and lost in the ocean, and of those kings that had fought
with him at Troy, some of whom were dead, some exiles like himself, forced
itself so strongly upon his mind that forgetful where he was he sobbed
outright with passion: which yet he restrained, but not so cunningly but
Alcinous perceived it and without taking notice of it to Ulysses,
privately gave signs that Demodocus should cease from his singing.

Next followed dancing in the Phaeacian fashion, when they would show
respect to their guests; which was succeeded by trials of skill, games of
strength, running, racing, hurling of the quoit, mock fights, hurling of
the javelin, shooting with the bow: in some of which Ulysses modestly
challenging his entertainers, performed such feats of strength and prowess
as gave the admiring Phaeacians fresh reason to imagine that he was either
some god, or hero of the race of the gods.

These solemn shows and pageants in honour of his guest king Alcinous
continued for the space of many days, as if he could never be weary of
showing courtesies to so worthy a stranger. In all this time he never
asked him his name, nor sought to know more of him than he of his own
accord disclosed; till on a day as they were seated feasting, after the
feast was ended, Demodocus being called, as was the custom, to sing some
grave matter, sang how Ulysses, on that night when Troy was fired, made
dreadful proof of his valour, maintaining singly a combat against the
whole household of Deiphobus, to which the divine expresser gave both act
and passion, and breathed such a fire into Ulysses's deeds that it
inspired old death with life in the lively expressing of slaughters, and
rendered life so sweet and passionate in the hearers that all who heard
felt it fleet from them in the narration: which made Ulysses even pity his
own slaughterous deeds, and feel touches of remorse, to see how song can
revive a dead man from the grave, yet no way can it defend a living man
from death; and in imagination he underwent some part of death's horrors,
and felt in his living body a taste of those dying pangs which he had
dealt to others; that with the strong conceit, tears (the true
interpreters of unutterable emotion) stood in his eyes.

Which king Alcinous noting, and that this was now the second time that he
had perceived him to be moved at the mention of events touching the Trojan
wars, he took occasion to ask whether his guest had lost any friend or
kinsman at Troy, that Demodocus's singing had brought into his mind. Then
Ulysses, drying the tears with his cloak, and observing that the eyes of
all the company were upon him, desirous to give them satisfaction in what
he could, and thinking this a fit time to reveal his true name and
destination, spake as follows:

"The courtesies which ye all have shown me, and in particular yourself and
princely daughter, O king Alcinous, demand from me that I should no longer
keep you in ignorance of what or who I am; for to reserve any secret from
you, who have with such openness of friendship embraced my love, would
argue either a pusillanimous or an ungrateful mind in me. Know, then, that
I am that Ulysses, of whom I perceive ye have heard something; who
heretofore have filled the world with the renown of my policies. I am he
by whose counsels, if Fame is to be believed at all, more than by the
united valour of all the Grecians, Troy fell. I am that unhappy man whom
the heavens and angry gods have conspired to keep an exile on the seas,
wandering to seek my home, which still flies from me. The land which I am
in quest of is Ithaca; in whose ports some ship belonging to your
navigation-famed Phaeacian state may haply at some time have found a
refuge from tempests. If ever you have experienced such kindness, requite
it now, by granting to me, who am the king of that land, a passport to
that land."

Admiration seized all the court of Alcinous, to behold in their presence
one of the number of those heroes who fought at Troy, whose divine story
had been made known to them by songs and poems, but of the truth they had
little known, or rather they had hitherto accounted those heroic exploits
as fictions and exaggerations of poets; but having seen and made proof of
the real Ulysses, they began to take those supposed inventions to be real
verities, and the tale of Troy to be as true as it was delightful.

Then king Alcinous made answer: "Thrice fortunate ought we to esteem our
lot, in having seen and conversed with a man of whom report hath spoken so
loudly, but, as it seems, nothing beyond the truth. Though we could desire
no felicity greater than to have you always among us, renowned Ulysses,
yet your desire having been expressed so often and so deeply to return
home, we can deny you nothing, though to our own loss. Our kingdom of
Phaeacia, as you know, is chiefly rich in shipping. In all parts of the
world, where there are navigable seas, or ships can pass, our vessels will
be found. You cannot name a coast to which they do not resort. Every rock
and every quicksand is known to them that lurks in the vast deep. They
pass a bird in flight; and with such unerring certainty they make to their
destination that some have said that they have no need of pilot or rudder,
but that they move instinctively, self-directed, and know the minds of
their voyagers. Thus much, that you may not fear to trust yourself in one
of our Phaeacian ships. Tomorrow, if you please, you shall launch forth.
To-day spend with us in feasting, who never can do enough when the gods
send such visitors."

Ulysses acknowledged king Alcinous's bounty; and while these two royal
personages stood interchanging courteous expressions, the heart of the
princess Nausicaa was overcome: she had been gazing attentively upon her
father's guest as he delivered his speech; but when he came to that part
where he declared himself to be Ulysses, she blessed herself and her
fortune that in relieving a poor shipwrecked mariner, as he seemed no
better, she had conferred a kindness on so divine a hero as he proved; and
scarce waiting till her father had done speaking, with a cheerful
countenance she addressed Ulysses, bidding him be cheerful, and when he
returned home, as by her father's means she trusted he would shortly,
sometimes to remember to whom he owed his life, and who met him in the
woods by the river Callicoe.

"Fair flower of Phaeacia," he replied, "so may all the gods bless me with
the strife of joys in that desired day, whenever I shall see it, as I
shall always acknowledge to be indebted to your fair hand for the gift of
life which I enjoy, and all the blessings which shall follow upon my
home-return. The gods give thee, Nausicaa, a princely husband; and from
you two spring blessings to this state." So prayed Ulysses, his heart
overflowing with admiration and grateful recollections of king Alcinous's
daughter.

Then at the king's request he gave them a brief relation of all the
adventures that had befallen him since he launched forth from Troy; during
which the princess Nausicaa took great delight (as ladies are commonly
taken with these kind of travellers' stories) to hear of the monster
Polyphemus, of the men that devour each other in Laestrygonia, of the
enchantress Circe, of Scylla, and the rest; to which she listened with a
breathless attention, letting fall a shower of tears from her fair eyes
every now and then, when Ulysses told of some more than usual distressful
passage in his travels; and all the rest of his auditors, if they had
before entertained a high respect for their guest, now felt their
veneration increased tenfold, when they learned from his own mouth what
perils, what sufferance, what endurance, of evils beyond man's strength to
support, this much-sustaining, almost heavenly man, by the greatness of
his mind, and by his invincible courage, had struggled through.

[Illustration: _He gave them a brief relation of all the adventures that
had befallen him_.]

The night was far spent before Ulysses had ended his narrative, and with
wishful glances he cast his eyes towards the eastern parts, which the sun
had begun to flecker with his first red; for on the morrow Alcinous had
promised that a bark should be in readiness to convoy him to Ithaca.

In the morning a vessel well manned and appointed was waiting for him;
into which the king and queen heaped presents of gold and silver, massy
plate, apparel, armour, and whatsoever things of cost or rarity they
judged would be most acceptable to their guest; and the sails being set,
Ulysses, embarking with expressions of regret, took his leave of his royal
entertainers, of the fair princess (who had been his first friend), and of
the peers of Phaeacia; who crowding down to the beach to have the last
sight of their illustrious visitant, beheld the gallant ship with all her
canvas spread, bounding and curveting over the waves, like a horse proud
of his rider, or as if she knew that in her capacious womb's rich
freightage she bore Ulysses.

He whose life past had been a series of disquiets, in seas among rude
waves, in battles amongst ruder foes, now slept securely, forgetting all;
his eye-lids bound in such deep sleep as only yielded to death; and when
they reached the nearest Ithacan port by the next morning, he was still
asleep. The mariners, not willing to awake him, landed him softly, and
laid him in a cave at the foot of an olive-tree, which made a shady recess
in that narrow harbour, the haunt of almost none but the sea-nymphs, which
are called Naiads; few ships before this Phaeacian vessel having put into
that haven, by reason of the difficulty and narrowness of the entrance.
Here leaving him asleep, and disposing in safe places near him the
presents with which king Alcinous had dismissed him, they departed for
Phaeacia; where these wretched mariners never again set foot; but just as
they arrived, and thought to salute their country earth, in sight of their
city's turrets, and in open view of their friends who from the harbour
with shouts greeted their return, their vessel and all the mariners which
were in her were turned to stone, and stood transformed and fixed in sight
of the whole Phaeacian city, where it yet stands, by Neptune's vindictive
wrath; who resented thus highly the contempt which those Phaeacians had
shown in convoying home a man whom the god had destined to destruction.
Whence it comes to pass that the Phaeacians at this day will at no price
be induced to lend their ships to strangers, or to become the carriers for
other nations, so highly do they still dread the displeasure of their
sea-god, while they see that terrible monument ever in sight.

When Ulysses awoke, which was not till some time after the mariners had
departed, he did not at first know his country again, either that long
absence had made it strange, or that Minerva (which was more likely) had
cast a cloud about his eyes, that he should have greater pleasure
hereafter in discovering his mistake; but like a man suddenly awaking in
some desert isle, to which his sea-mates have transported him in his
sleep, he looked around, and discerning no known objects, he cast his
hands to heaven for pity, and complained on those ruthless men who had
beguiled him with a promise of conveying him home to this country, and
perfidiously left him to perish in an unknown land. But then the rich
presents of gold and silver given him by Alcinous, which he saw carefully
laid up in secure places near him, staggered him: which seemed not like
the act of wrongful or unjust men, such as turn pirates for gain, or land
helpless passengers in remote coasts to possess themselves of their goods.

While he remained in this suspense, there came up to him a young shepherd,
clad in the finer sort of apparel, such as kings' sons wore in those days
when princes did not disdain to tend sheep, who, accosting him, was
saluted again by Ulysses, who asked him what country that was on which he
had been just landed, and whether it were part of a continent, or an
island. The young shepherd made show of wonder, to hear any one ask the
name of that land; as country people are apt to esteem those for mainly
ignorant and barbarous who do not know the names of places which are
familiar to _them_, though perhaps they who ask have had no opportunities
of knowing, and may have come from far countries.

"I had thought," said he, "that all people knew our land. It is rocky and
barren, to be sure; but well enough: it feeds a goat or an ox well; it is
not wanting either in wine or in wheat; it has good springs of water, some
fair rivers; and wood enough, as you may see: it is called Ithaca."

Ulysses was joyed enough to find himself in his own country; but so
prudently he carried his joy, that, dissembling his true name and quality,
he pretended to the shepherd that he was only some foreigner who by stress
of weather had put into that port; and framed on the sudden a story to
make it plausible, how he had come from Crete in a ship of Phaeacia; when
the young shepherd, laughing, and taking Ulysses's hand in both his, said
to him: "He must be cunning, I find, who thinks to overreach you. What,
cannot you quit your wiles and your subtleties, now that you are in a
state of security? must the first word with which you salute your native
earth be an untruth? and think you that you are unknown?"

Ulysses looked again; and he saw, not a shepherd, but a beautiful woman,
whom he immediately knew to be the goddess Minerva, that in the wars of
Troy had frequently vouchsafed her sight to him; and had been with him
since in perils, saving him unseen.

"Let not my ignorance offend thee, great Minerva," he cried, "or move thy
displeasure, that in that shape I knew thee not; since the skill of
discerning of deities is not attainable by wit or study, but hard to be
hit by the wisest of mortals. To know thee truly through all thy changes
is only given to those whom thou art pleased to grace. To all men thou
takest all likenesses. All men in their wits think that they know thee,
and that they have thee. Thou art wisdom itself. But a semblance of thee,
which is false wisdom, often is taken for thee, so thy counterfeit view
appears to many, but thy true presence to few: those are they which,
loving thee above all, are inspired with light from thee to know thee. But
this I surely know, that all the time the sons of Greece waged war against
Troy, I was sundry times graced with thy appearance; but since, I have
never been able to set eyes upon thee till now; but have wandered at my
own discretion, to myself a blind guide, erring up and down the world,
wanting thee."

Then Minerva cleared his eyes, and he knew the ground on which he stood to
be Ithaca, and that cave to be the same which the people of Ithaca had in
former times made sacred to the sea-nymphs, and where he himself had done
sacrifices to them a thousand times; and full in his view stood Mount
Nerytus with all his woods: so that now he knew for a certainty that he
was arrived in his own country, and with the delight which he felt he
could not forbear stooping down and kissing the soil.




CHAPTER EIGHT

The Change from a King to a Beggar.--Eumaeus and the Herdsmen.--
Telemachus.


Not long did Minerva suffer him to indulge vain transports; but briefly
recounting to him the events which had taken place in Ithaca during his
absence, she showed him that his way to his wife and throne did not lie so
open, but that before he were reinstated in the secure possession of them
he must encounter many difficulties. His palace, wanting its king, was
become the resort of insolent and imperious men, the chief nobility of
Ithaca and of the neighboring isles, who, in the confidence of Ulysses
being dead, came as suitors to Penelope. The queen (it was true) continued
single, but was little better than a state-prisoner in the power of these
men, who, under a pretence of waiting her decision, occupied the king's
house rather as owners than guests, lording and domineering at their
pleasure, profaning the palace and wasting the royal substance with their
feasts and mad riots. Moreover, the goddess told him how, fearing the
attempts of these lawless men upon the person of his young son Telemachus,
she herself had put it into the heart of the prince to go and seek his
father in far countries; how in the shape of Mentor she had borne him
company in his long search; which, though failing, as she meant it should
fail, in its first object, had yet had this effect, that through hardships
he had learned endurance, through experience he had gathered wisdom, and
wherever his footsteps had been he had left such memorials of his worth as
the fame of Ulysses's son was already blown throughout the world. That it
was now not many days since Telemachus had arrived in the island, to the
great joy of the queen his mother, who had thought him dead, by reason of
his long absence, and had begun to mourn for him with a grief equal to
that which she endured for Ulysses: the goddess herself having so ordered
the course of his adventures that the time of his return should correspond
with the return of Ulysses, that they might together concert measures how
to repress the power and insolence of those wicked suitors. This the
goddess told him; but of the particulars of his son's adventures, of his
having been detained in the Delightful Island, which his father had so
lately left, of Calypso and her nymphs, and the many strange occurrences
which may be read with profit and delight in the history of the prince's
adventures, she forbore to tell him as yet, as judging that he would hear
them with greater pleasure from the lips of his son, when he should have
him in an hour of stillness and safety, when their work should be done,
and none of their enemies left alive to trouble them.

[Illustration: _Consulting how they might with safety bring about his
restoration_.]

Then they sat down, the goddess and Ulysses, at the foot of a wild
olive-tree, consulting how they might with safety bring about his
restoration. And when Ulysses revolved in his mind how that his enemies
were a multitude, and he single, he began to despond, and he said, "I shall
die an ill death like Agamemnon; in the threshold of my own house I shall
perish, like that unfortunate monarch, slain by some one of my wife's
suitors." But then again calling to mind his ancient courage, he secretly
wished that Minerva would but breathe such a spirit into his bosom as she
inflamed him with in the hour of Troy's destruction, that he might
encounter with three hundred of those impudent suitors at once, and strew
the pavements of his beautiful palace with their bloods and brains.

And Minerva knew his thoughts, and she said, "I will be strongly with
thee, if thou fail not to do thy part. And for a sign between us that I
will perform my promise and for a token on thy part of obedience, I must
change thee, that thy person may not be known of men."

Then Ulysses bowed his head to receive the divine impression, and Minerva
by her great power changed his person so that it might not be known. She
changed him to appearance into a very old man, yet such a one as by his
limbs and gait seemed to have been some considerable person in his time,
and to retain yet some remains of his once prodigious strength. Also,
instead of those rich robes in which king Alcinous had clothed him, she
threw over his limbs such old and tattered rags as wandering beggars
usually wear. A staff supported his steps, and a scrip hung to his back,
such as travelling mendicants used to hold the scraps which are given to
them at rich men's doors. So from a king he became a beggar, as wise
Tiresias had predicted to him in the shades.

To complete his humiliation, and to prove his obedience by suffering, she
next directed him in his beggarly attire to go and present himself to his
old herdsman Eumaeus, who had the care of his swine and his cattle, and
had been a faithful steward to him all the time of his absence. Then
strictly charging Ulysses that he should reveal himself to no man, but to
his own son, whom she would send to him when she saw occasion, the goddess
went her way.

The transformed Ulysses bent his course to the cottage of the herdsman,
and, entering in at the front court, the dogs, of which Eumaeus kept many
fierce ones for the protection of the cattle, flew with open mouths upon
him, as those ignoble animals have oftentimes an antipathy to the sight of
anything like a beggar, and would have rent him in pieces with their
teeth, if Ulysses had not had the prudence to let fall his staff, which
had chiefly provoked their fury, and sat himself down in a careless
fashion upon the ground; but for all that some serious hurt had certainly
been done to him, so raging the dogs were, had not the herdsman, whom the
barking of the dogs had fetched out of the house, with shouting and with
throwing of stones repressed them.

He said, when he saw Ulysses, "Old father, how near you were to being torn
in pieces by these rude dogs! I should never have forgiven myself, if
through neglect of mine any hurt had happened to you. But Heaven has given
me so many cares to my portion that I might well be excused for not
attending to everything: while here I lie grieving and mourning for the
absence of that majesty which once ruled here, and am forced to fatten his
swine and his cattle for food to evil men, who hate him and who wish his
death; when he perhaps strays up and down the world, and has not wherewith
to appease hunger, if indeed he yet lives (which is a question) and enjoys
the cheerful light of the sun." This he said, little thinking that he of
whom he spoke now stood before him, and that in that uncouth disguise and
beggarly obscurity was present the hidden majesty of Ulysses.

Then he had his guest into the house, and sat meat and drink before him;
and Ulysses said, "May Jove and all the other gods requite you for the
kind speeches and hospitable usage which you have shown me!"

Eumaeus made answer, "My poor guest, if one in much worse plight than
yourself had arrived here, it were a shame to such scanty means as I have
if I had let him depart without entertaining him to the best of my
ability. Poor men, and such as have no houses of their own, are by Jove
himself recommended to our care. But the cheer which we that are servants
to other men have to bestow is but sorry at most, yet freely and lovingly
I give it you. Indeed, there once ruled here a man, whose return the gods
have set their faces against, who, if he had been suffered to reign in
peace and grow old among us, would have been kind to me and mine. But he
is gone; and for his sake would to God that the whole posterity of Helen
might perish with her, since in her quarrel so many worthies have
perished! But such as your fare is, eat it, and be welcome--such lean
beasts as are food for poor herdsmen. The fattest go to feed the voracious
stomachs of the queen's suitors. Shame on their unworthiness! there is no
day in which two or three of the noblest of the herd are not slain to
support their feasts and their surfeits."

[Illustration: '_But such as your fare is, eat it, and be welcome_.']

Ulysses gave good ear to his words; and as he ate his meat, he even tore
it and rent it with his teeth, for mere vexation that his fat cattle
should be slain to glut the appetites of those godless suitors. And he
said, "What chief or what ruler is this, that thou commendest so highly,
and sayest that he perished at Troy? I am but a stranger in these parts.
It may be I have heard of some such in my long travels."

Eumaeus answered, "Old father, never any one of all the strangers that
have come to our coast with news of Ulysses being alive could gain credit
with the queen or her son yet. These travellers, to get raiment or a meal,
will not stick to invent any lie. Truth is not the commodity they deal in.
Never did the queen get anything of them but lies. She receives all that
come graciously, hears their stories, inquires all she can, but all ends
in tears and dissatisfaction. But in God's name, old father, if you have
got a tale, make the most on't, it may gain you a cloak or a coat from
somebody to keep you warm; but for him who is the subject of it, dogs and
vultures long since have torn him limb from limb, or some great fish at
sea has devoured him, or he lieth with no better monument upon his bones
than the sea-sand. But for me past all the race of men were tears created;
for I never shall find so kind a royal master more; not if my father or my
mother could come again and visit me from the tomb, would my eyes be so
blessed, as they should be with the sight of him again, coming as from the
dead. In his last rest my soul shall love him. He is not here, nor do I
name him as a flatterer, but because I am thankful for his love and care
which he had to me a poor man; and if I knew surely that he were past all
shores that the sun shines upon, I would invoke him as a deified thing."

For this saying of Eumaeus the waters stood in Ulysses's eyes, and he
said, "My friend, to say and to affirm positively that he cannot be alive
is to give too much license to incredulity. For, not to speak at random,
but with as much solemnity as an oath comes to, I say to you that Ulysses
shall return; and whenever that day shall be, then shall you give to me a
cloak and a coat; but till then, I will not receive so much as a thread of
a garment, but rather go naked; for no less than the gates of hell do I
hate that man whom poverty can force to tell an untruth. Be Jove then
witness to my words, that this very year, nay, ere this month be fully
ended, your eyes shall behold Ulysses, dealing vengeance in his own palace
upon the wrongers of his wife and his son."

To give the better credence to his words, he amused Eumaeus with a forged
story of his life; feigning of himself that he was a Cretan born, and one
that went with Idomeneus to the wars of Troy. Also he said that he knew
Ulysses, and related various passages which he alleged to have happened
betwixt Ulysses and himself, which were either true in the main, as having
really happened between Ulysses and some other person, or were so like to
truth, as corresponding with the known character and actions of Ulysses,
that Eumaeus's incredulity was not a little shaken. Among other things he
asserted that he had lately been entertained in the court of Thesprotia,
where the king's son of the country had told him that Ulysses had been
there but just before him, and was gone upon a voyage to the oracle of
Jove in Dodona, whence he should shortly return, and a ship would be ready
by the bounty of the Thesprotians to convoy him straight to Ithaca. "And
in token that what I tell you is true," said Ulysses, "if your king come
not within the period which I have named, you shall have leave to give
your servants commandment to take my old carcass, and throw it headlong
from some steep rock into the sea, that poor men, taking example by me,
may fear to lie." But Eumaeus made answer that that should be small
satisfaction or pleasure to him.

So while they sat discoursing in this manner, supper was served in, and
the servants of the herdsman, who had been out all day in the fields, came
in to supper, and took their seats at the fire, for the night was bitter
and frosty. After supper, Ulysses, who had well eaten and drunken, and was
refreshed with the herdsman's good cheer, was resolved to try whether his
host's hospitality would extend to the lending him a good warm mantle or
rug to cover him in the night season; and framing an artful tale for the
purpose, in a merry mood, filling a cup of Greek wine, he thus began:

"I will tell you a story of your king Ulysses and myself. If there is ever
a time when a man may have leave to tell his own stories, it is when he
has drunken a little too much. Strong liquor driveth the fool, and moves
even the heart of the wise, moves and impels him to sing and to dance, and
break forth in pleasant laughters, and perchance to prefer a speech too
which were better kept in. When the heart is open, the tongue will be
stirring. But you shall hear. We led our powers to ambush once under the
walls of Troy."

The herdsmen crowded about him eager to hear anything which related to
their king Ulysses and the wars of Troy, and thus he went on:

"I remember, Ulysses and Menelaus had the direction of that enterprise,
and they were pleased to join me with them in the command. I was at that
time in some repute among men, though fortune has played me a trick since,
as you may perceive. But I was somebody in those times, and could do
something. Be that as it may, a bitter freezing night it was, such a night
as this, the air cut like steel, and the sleet gathered on our shields
like crystal. There was some twenty of us, that lay close crouched down
among the reeds and bulrushes that grew in the moat that goes round the
city. The rest of us made tolerable shift, for every man had been careful
to bring with him a good cloak or mantle to wrap over his armour and keep
himself warm; but I, as it chanced, had left my cloak behind me, as not
expecting that the night would prove so cold, or rather I believe because
I had at that time a brave suit of new armour on, which, being a soldier,
and having some of the soldier's vice about me--_vanity_--I was not
willing should be hidden under a cloak; but I paid for my indiscretion
with my sufferings, for with the inclement night, and the wet of the ditch
in which we lay, I was well-nigh frozen to death; and when I could endure
no longer, I jogged Ulysses who was next to me, and had a nimble ear, and
made known my case to him, assuring him that I must inevitably perish. He
answered in a low whisper, 'Hush, lest any Greek should hear you, and take
notice of your softness.' Not a word more he said, but showed as if he had
no pity for the plight I was in. But he was as considerate as he was
brave; and even then, as he lay with his head reposing upon his hand, he
was meditating how to relieve me, without exposing my weakness to the
soldiers. At last, raising up his head, he made as if he had been asleep,
and said, 'Friends, I have been warned in a dream to send to the fleet to
king Agamemnon for a supply, to recruit our numbers, for we are not
sufficient for this enterprise; and they believing him, one Thoas was
despatched on that errand, who departing, for more speed, as Ulysses had
foreseen, left his upper garment behind him, a good warm mantle, to which
I succeeded, and by the help of it got through the night with credit. This
shift Ulysses made for one in need, and would to heaven that I had now
that strength in my limbs which made me in those days to be accounted fit
to be a leader under Ulysses! I should not then want the loan of a cloak
or a mantle, to wrap about me and shield my old limbs from the night air."

The tale pleased the herdsmen; and Eumaeus, who more than all the rest was
gratified to hear tales of Ulysses, true or false, said that for his story
he deserved a mantle, and a night's lodging, which he should have; and he
spread for him a bed of goat and sheep skins by the fire; and the seeming
beggar, who was indeed the true Ulysses, lay down and slept under that
poor roof, in that abject disguise to which the will of Minerva had
subjected him.

When morning was come, Ulysses made offer to depart, as if he were not
willing to burden his host's hospitality any longer, but said that he
would go and try the humanity of the townsfolk, if any there would bestow
upon him a bit of bread or a cup of drink. Perhaps the queen's suitors (he
said), out of their full feasts, would bestow a scrap on him; for he could
wait at table, if need were, and play the nimble serving-man; he could
fetch wood (he said) or build a fire, prepare roast meat or boiled, mix
the wine with water, or do any of those offices which recommended poor men
like him to services in great men's houses.

"Alas! poor guest," said Eumaeus, "you know not what you speak. What
should so poor and old a man as you do at the suitors' tables? Their light
minds are not given to such grave servitors. They must have youths, richly
tricked out in flowing vests, with curled hair, like so many of Jove's
cupbearers, to fill out the wine to them as they sit at table, and to
shift their trenchers. Their gorged insolence would but despise and make a
mock at thy age. Stay here. Perhaps the queen, or Telemachus, hearing of
thy arrival, may send to thee of their bounty."

As he spake these words, the steps of one crossing the front court were
heard, and a noise of the dogs fawning and leaping about as for joy; by
which token Eumaeus guessed that it was the prince, who, hearing of a
traveller being arrived at Eumaeus's cottage that brought tidings of his
father, was come to search the truth; and Eumaeus said, "It is the tread
of Telemachus, the son of king Ulysses." Before he could well speak the
words, the prince was at the door, whom Ulysses rising to receive,
Telemachus would not suffer that so aged a man, as he appeared, should
rise to do respect to him, but he courteously and reverently took him by
the hand, and inclined his head to him, as if he had surely known that it
was his father indeed; but Ulysses covered his eyes with his hands, that
he might not show the waters which stood in them. And Telemachus said, "Is
this the man who can tell us tidings of the king my father?"

"He brags himself to be a Cretan born," said Eumaeus, "and that he has
been a soldier and a traveller, but whether he speak the truth or not he
alone can tell. But whatsoever he has been, what he is now is apparent.
Such as he appears, I give him to you; do what you will with him; his
boast at present is that he is at the very best a supplicant."

"Be he what he may," said Telemachus, "I accept him at your hands. But
where I should bestow him I know not, seeing that in the palace his age
would not exempt him from the scorn and contempt which my mother's suitors
in their light minds would be sure to fling upon him: a mercy if he
escaped without blows; for they are a company of evil men, whose
profession is wrongs and violence."

Ulysses answered: "Since it is free for any man to speak in presence of
your greatness, I must say that my heart puts on a wolfish inclination to
tear and to devour, hearing your speech, that these suitors should with
such injustice rage, where you should have the rule solely. What should
the cause be? do you wilfully give way to their ill manners? or has your
government been such as has procured ill-will towards you from your
people? or do you mistrust your kinsfolk and friends in such sort as
without trial to decline their aid? A man's kindred are they that he might
trust to when extremities run high."

Telemachus replied: "The kindred of Ulysses are few. I have no brothers to
assist me in the strife. But the suitors are powerful in kindred and
friends. The house of old Arcesius has had this fate from the heavens,
that from old it still has been supplied with single heirs. To Arcesius,
Laertes only was born, from Laertes descended only Ulysses, from Ulysses I
alone have sprung, whom he left so young that from me never comfort arose
to him. But the end of all rests in the hands of the gods."

Then Eumaeus departing to see to some necessary business of his herds,
Minerva took a woman's shape, and stood in the entry of the door, and was
seen to Ulysses, but by his son she was not seen, for the presences of the
gods are invisible save to those to whom they will to reveal themselves.
Nevertheless, the dogs which were about the door saw the goddess, and
durst not bark, but went crouching and licking of the dust for fear. And
giving signs to Ulysses that the time was now come in which he should make
himself known to his son, by her great power she changed back his shape
into the same which it was before she transformed him; and Telemachus, who
saw the change, but nothing of the manner by which it was effected, only
he saw the appearance of a king in the vigour of his age where but just
now he had seen a worn and decrepit beggar, was struck with fear, and
said, "Some god has done this house this honour," and he turned away his
eyes, and would have worshipped. But his father permitted not, but said,
"Look better at me; I am no deity; why put you upon me the reputation of
godhead? I am no more but thy father: I am even he; I am that Ulysses by
reason of whose absence thy youth has been exposed to such wrongs from
injurious men." Then kissed he his son, nor could any longer refrain those
tears which he had held under such mighty restraint before, though they
would ever be forcing themselves out in spite of him; but now, as if their
sluices had burst, they came out like rivers, pouring upon the warm cheeks
of his son. Nor yet by all these violent arguments could Telemachus be
persuaded to believe that it was his father, but he said some deity had
taken that shape to mock him; for he affirmed that it was not in the power
of any man, who is sustained by mortal food, to change his shape so in a
moment from age to youth: for, "but now," said he, "you were all wrinkles,
and were old, and now you look as the gods are pictured."

[Illustration: "_I am no more but thy father: I am even he._"]

His father replied: "Admire, but fear not, and know me to be at all parts
substantially thy father, who in the inner powers of his mind, and the
unseen workings of a father's love to thee, answers to his outward shape
and pretence! There shall no more Ulysseses come here. I am he that after
twenty years' absence, and suffering a world of ill, have recovered at
last the sight of my country earth. It was the will of Minerva that I
should be changed as you saw me. She put me thus together; she puts
together or takes to pieces whom she pleases. It is in the law of her free
power to do it: sometimes to show her favourites under a cloud, and poor,
and again to restore to them their ornaments. The gods raise and throw
down men with ease."

Then Telemachus could hold out no longer, but he gave way now to a full
belief and persuasion, of that which for joy at first he could not credit,
that it was indeed his true and very father that stood before him; and
they embraced, and mingled their tears.

Then said Ulysses, "Tell me who these suitors are, what are their numbers,
and how stands the queen thy mother affected to them?"

"She bears them still in expectation," said Telemachus, "which she never
means to fulfil, that she will accept the hand of some one of them in
second nuptials. For she fears to displease them by an absolute refusal.
So from day to day she lingers them on with hope, which they are content
to bear the deferring of, while they have entertainment at free cost in
our palace."

Then said Ulysses, "Reckon up their numbers that we may know their
strength and ours, if we having none but ourselves may hope to prevail
against them."

"O father," he replied, "I have ofttimes heard of your fame for wisdom,
and of the great strength of your arm, but the venturous mind which your
speeches now indicate moves me even to amazement: for in nowise can it
consist with wisdom or a sound mind that two should try their strengths
against a host. Nor five, or ten, or twice ten strong are these suitors,
but many more by much: from Dulichium came there fifty and two, they and
their servants; twice twelve crossed the seas hither from Samos; from
Zacynthus twice ten; of our native Ithacans, men of chief note, are twelve
who aspire to the bed and crown of Penelope; and all these under one
strong roof--a fearful odds against two! My father, there is need of
caution, lest the cup which your great mind so thirsts to taste of
vengeance prove bitter to yourself in the drinking. And therefore it were
well that we should bethink us of some one who might assist us in this
undertaking."

"Thinkest thou," said his father, "if we had Minerva and the king of skies
to be our friends, would their sufficiencies make strong our part; or must
we look out for some further aid yet?"

"They you speak of are above the clouds," said Telemachus, "and are sound
aids indeed; as powers that not only exceed human, but bear the chiefest
sway among the gods themselves."

Then Ulysses gave directions to his son to go and mingle with the suitors,
and in nowise to impart his secret to any, not even to the queen his
mother, but to hold himself in readiness, and to have his weapons and his
good armour in preparation. And he charged him that when he himself should
come to the palace, as he meant to follow shortly after, and present
himself in his beggar's likeness to the suitors, that whatever he should
see which might grieve his heart, with what foul usage and contumelious
language soever the suitors should receive his father, coming in that
shape, though they should strike and drag him by the heels along the
floors, that he should not stir nor make offer to oppose them, further
than by mild words to expostulate with them, until Minerva from heaven
should give the sign which should be the prelude to their destruction.
And Telemachus, promising to obey his instructions, departed; and the
shape of Ulysses fell to what it had been before, and he became to all
outward appearance a beggar, in base and beggarly attire.




CHAPTER NINE

The Queen's Suitors.--The Battle of the Beggars.--The Armour Taken Down.--
The Meeting with Penelope.


From the house of Eumaeus the seeming beggar took his way, leaning on his
staff, till he reached the palace, entering in at the hall where the
suitors sat at meat. They in the pride of their feasting began to break
their jests in mirthful manner, when they saw one looking so poor and so
aged approach. He, who expected no better entertainment, was nothing moved
at their behaviour, but, as became the character which he had assumed, in
a suppliant posture crept by turns to every suitor, and held out his hands
for some charity, with such a natural and beggar-resembling grace that he
might seem to have practised begging all his life; yet there was a sort of
dignity in his most abject stoopings, that whoever had seen him would have
said, If it had pleased Heaven that this poor man had been born a king, he
would gracefully have filled a throne. And some pitied him, and some gave
him alms, as their present humours inclined them, but the greater part
reviled him, and bade him begone, as one that spoiled their feast; for the
presence of misery has this power with it, that, while it stays, it can
ash and overturn the mirth even of those who feel no pity or wish to
relieve it: nature bearing this witness of herself in the hearts of the
most obdurate.

[Illustration: _But the greater part reviled him and bade him begone_.]

Now Telemachus sat at meat with the suitors, and knew that it was the king
his father who in that shape begged an alms; and when his father came and
presented himself before him in turn, as he had done to the suitors one by
one, he gave him of his own meat which he had in his dish, and of his own
cup to drink. And the suitors were past measure offended to see a pitiful
beggar, as they esteemed him, to be so choicely regarded by the prince.

Then Antinous, who was a great lord, and of chief note among the suitors,
said, "Prince Telemachus does ill to encourage these wandering beggars,
who go from place to place, affirming that they have been some
considerable persons in their time, filling the ears of such as hearken to
them with lies, and pressing with their bold feet into kings' palaces.
This is some saucy vagabond, some travelling Egyptian."

"I see," said Ulysses, "that a poor man should get but little at your
board; scarce should he get salt from your hands, if he brought his own
meat."

Lord Antinous, indignant to be answered with such sharpness by a supposed
beggar, snatched up a stool, with which he smote Ulysses where the neck
and shoulders join. This usage moved not Ulysses; but in his great heart
he meditated deep evils to come upon them all, which for a time must be
kept close, and he went and sat himself down in the door-way to eat of
that which was given him; and he said, "For life or possessions a man will
fight, but for his belly this man smites. If a poor man has any god to
take his part, my lord Antinous shall not live to be the queen's husband."

Then Antinous raged highly, and threatened to drag him by the heels, and
to rend his rags about his ears, if he spoke another word.

But the other suitors did in nowise approve of the harsh language, nor of
the blow which Antinous had dealt; and some of them said, "Who knows but
one of the deities goes about hid under that poor disguise? for in the
likeness of poor pilgrims the gods have many times descended to try the
dispositions of men, whether they be humane or impious." While these
things passed, Telemachus sat and observed all, but held his peace,
remembering the instructions of his father. But secretly he waited for the
sign which Minerva was to send from heaven.

That day there followed Ulysses to the court one of the common sort of
beggars, Irus by name, one that had received alms beforetime of the
suitors, and was their ordinary sport, when they were inclined (as that
day) to give way to mirth, to see him eat and drink; for he had the
appetite of six men, and was of huge stature and proportions of body; yet
had in him no spirit nor courage of a man. This man, thinking to curry
favour with the suitors, and recommend himself especially to such a great
lord as Antinous was, began to revile and scorn Ulysses, putting foul
language upon him, and fairly challenging him to fight with the fist. But
Ulysses, deeming his railings to be nothing more than jealousy and that
envious disposition which beggars commonly manifest to brothers in their
trade, mildly besought him not to trouble him, but to enjoy that portion
which the liberality of their entertainers gave him, as he did quietly;
seeing that, of their bounty, there was sufficient for all.

But Irus, thinking that this forbearance in Ulysses was nothing more than
a sign of fear, so much the more highly stormed, and bellowed, and
provoked him to fight; and by this time the quarrel had attracted the
notice of the suitors, who with loud laughters and shouting egged on the
dispute, and lord Antinous swore by all the gods it should be a battle,
and that in that hall the strife should be determined. To this the rest of
the suitors with violent clamours acceded, and a circle was made for the
combatants, and a fat goat was proposed as the victor's prize, as at the
Olympic or the Pythian games. Then Ulysses, seeing no remedy, or being not
unwilling that the suitors should behold some proof of that strength which
ere long in their own persons they were to taste of, stripped himself, and
prepared for the combat. But first he demanded that he should have fair
play shown him, that none in that assembly should aid his opponent, or
take part against him, for, being an old man, they might easily crush him
with their strengths. And Telemachus passed his word that no foul play
should be shown him, but that each party should be left to their own
unassisted strengths, and to this he made Antinous and the rest of the
suitors swear.

But when Ulysses had laid aside his garments, and was bare to the waist,
all the beholders admired at the goodly sight of his large shoulders,
being of such exquisite shape and whiteness, and at his great and brawny
bosom, and the youthful strength which seemed to remain in a man thought
so old; and they said, What limbs and what sinews he has! and coward fear
seized on the mind of that great vast beggar, and he dropped his threats,
and his big words, and would have fled, but lord Antinous stayed him, and
threatened him that if he declined the combat, he would put him in a ship,
and land him on the shores where king Echetus reigned, the roughest tyrant
which at that time the world contained, and who had that antipathy to
rascal beggars, such as he, that when any landed on his coast he would
crop their ears and noses and give them to the dogs to tear. So Irus, in
whom fear of king Echetus prevailed above the fear of Ulysses, addressed
himself to fight. But Ulysses, provoked to be engaged in so odious a
strife with a fellow of his base conditions, and loathing longer to be
made a spectacle to entertain the eyes of his foes, with one blow, which
he struck him beneath the ear, so shattered the teeth and jawbone of this
soon baffled coward that he laid him sprawling in the dust, with small
stomach or ability to renew the contest. Then raising him on his feet, he
led him bleeding and sputtering to the door, and put his staff into his
hand, and bade him go use his command upon dogs and swine, but not presume
himself to be lord of the guests another time, nor of the beggary!

The suitors applauded in their vain minds the issue of the contest, and
rioted in mirth at the expense of poor Irus, who they vowed should be
forthwith embarked, and sent to king Echetus; and they bestowed thanks on
Ulysses for ridding the court of that unsavoury morsel, as they called
him; but in their inward souls they would not have cared if Irus had been
victor, and Ulysses had taken the foil, but it was mirth to them to see
the beggars fight. In such pastimes and light entertainments the day wore
away.

When evening was come, the suitors betook themselves to music and dancing.
And Ulysses leaned his back against a pillar from which certain lamps hung
which gave light to the dancers, and he made show of watching the dancers,
but very different thoughts were in his head. And as he stood near the
lamps, the light fell upon his head, which was thin of hair and bald, as
an old man's. And Eurymachus, a suitor, taking occasion from some words
which were spoken before, scoffed, and said, "Now I know for a certainty
that some god lurks under the poor and beggarly appearance of this man,
for, as he stands by the lamps, his sleek head throws beams around it,
like as it were a glory." And another said, "He passes his time, too, not
much unlike the gods, lazily living exempt from labour, taking offerings
of men." "I warrant," said Eurymachus again, "he could not raise a fence
or dig a ditch for his livelihood, if a man would hire him to work in a
garden."

"I wish," said Ulysses, "that you who speak this and myself were to be
tried at any taskwork: that I had a good crooked scythe put in my hand,
that was sharp and strong, and you such another, where the grass grew
longest, to be up by daybreak, mowing the meadows till the sun went down,
not tasting of food till we had finished; or that we were set to plough
four acres in one day of good glebe land, to see whose furrows were
evenest and cleanest; or that we might have one wrestling-bout together;
or that in our right hands a good steel-headed lance were placed, to try
whose blows fell heaviest and thickest upon the adversary's head-piece. I
would cause you such work as you should have small reason to reproach me
with being slack at work. But you would do well to spare me this reproach,
and to save your strength till the owner of this house shall return, till
the day when Ulysses shall return, when returning he shall enter upon his
birthright."

This was a galling speech to those suitors, to whom Ulysses's return was
indeed the thing which they most dreaded; and a sudden fear fell upon
their souls, as if they were sensible of the real presence of that man who
did indeed stand amongst them, but not in that form as they might know
him; and Eurymachus, incensed, snatched a massy cup which stood on a table
near and hurled it at the head of the supposed beggar, and but narrowly
missed the hitting of him; and all the suitors rose, as at once, to thrust
him out of the hall, which they said his beggarly presence and his rude
speeches had profaned. But Telemachus cried to them to forbear, and not to
presume to lay hands upon a wretched man to whom he had promised
protection. He asked if they were mad, to mix such abhorred uproar with
his feasts. He bade them take their food and their wine, to sit up or to
go to bed at their free pleasures, so long as he should give license to
that freedom; but why should they abuse his banquet, or let the words
which a poor beggar spake have power to move their spleens so fiercely'

They bit their lips and frowned for anger to be checked so by a youth;
nevertheless for that time they had the grace to abstain, either for
shame, or that Minerva had infused into them a terror of Ulysses's son.

So that day's feast was concluded without bloodshed, and the suitors,
tired with their sports, departed severally each man to his apartment.
Only Ulysses and Telemachus remained. And now Telemachus, by his father's
direction, went and brought down into the hall armour and lances from the
armoury; for Ulysses said, "On the morrow we shall have need of them." And
moreover he said, "If any one shall ask why you have taken them down, say
it is to clean them and scour them from the rust which they have gathered
since the owner of this house went for Troy." And as Telemachus stood by
the armour, the lights were all gone out, and it was pitch dark, and the
armour gave out glistering beams as of fire, and he said to his father,
"The pillars of the house are on fire." And his father said, "It is the
gods who sit above the stars, and have power to make the night as light as
the day." And he took it for a good omen. And Telemachus fell to cleaning
and sharpening of the lances.

Now Ulysses had not seen his wife Penelope in all the time since his
return; for the queen did not care to mingle with the suitors at their
banquets, but, as became one that had been Ulysses's wife, kept much in
private, spinning and doing her excellent housewiferies among her maids in
the remote apartments of the palace. Only upon solemn days she would come
down and show herself to the suitors. And Ulysses was filled with a
longing desire to see his wife again, whom for twenty years he had not
beheld, and he softly stole through the known passages of his beautiful
house, till he came where the maids were lighting the queen through a
stately gallery that led to the chamber where she slept. And when the
maids saw Ulysses, they said, "It is the beggar who came to the court
to-day, about whom all that uproar was stirred up in the hall: what does he
here?" But Penelope gave commandment that he should be brought before her,
for she said, "It may be that he has travelled, and has heard something
concerning Ulysses."

[Illustration: _Where the maids were lighting the queen through a stately
gallery_.]

Then was Ulysses right glad to hear himself named by his queen, to find
himself in nowise forgotten, nor her great love towards him decayed in all
that time that he had been away And he stood before his queen, and she
knew him not to be Ulysses, but supposed that he had been some poor
traveller. And she asked him of what country he was.

He told her (as he had before told Eumaeus) that he was a Cretan born,
and, however poor and cast down he now seemed, no less a man than brother
to Idomeneus, who was grandson to king Minos; and though he now wanted
bread, he had once had it in his power to feast Ulysses. Then he feigned
how Ulysses, sailing for Troy, was forced by stress of weather to put his
fleet in at a port of Crete, where for twelve days he was his guest, and
entertained by him with all befitting guest-rites. And he described the
very garments which Ulysses had on, by which Penelope knew he had seen her
lord.

In this manner Ulysses told his wife many tales of himself, at most but
painting, but painting so near to the life that the feeling of that which
she took in at her ears became so strong that the kindly tears ran down
her fair cheeks, while she thought upon her lord, dead as she thought him,
and heavily mourned the loss of him whom she missed, whom she could not
find, though in very deed he stood so near her.

Ulysses was moved to see her weep, but he kept his own eyes dry as iron or
horn in their lids, putting a bridle upon his strong passion, that it
should not issue to sight.

Then told he how he had lately been at the court of Thesprotia, and what
he had learned concerning Ulysses there, in order as he had delivered to
Eumaeus; and Penelope was wont to believe that there might be a
possibility of Ulysses being alive, and she said, "I dreamed a dream this
morning. Methought I had twenty household fowl which did eat wheat steeped
in water from my hand, and there came suddenly from the clouds a
crooked-beaked  hawk, who soused on them and killed them all, trussing
their necks; then took his flight back up to the clouds. And in my dream
methought that I wept and made great moan for my fowls, and for the
destruction which the hawk had made; and my maids came about me to comfort
me. And in the height of my griefs the hawk came back, and lighting upon
the beam of my chamber, he said to me in a man's voice, which sounded
strangely even in my dream, to hear a hawk to speak: 'Be of good cheer,'
he said, 'O daughter of Icarius for this is no dream which thou hast seen,
but that which shall happen to thee indeed. Those household fowl, which
thou lamentest so without reason, are the suitors who devour thy
substance, even as thou sawest the fowl eat from thy hand; and the hawk
is thy husband, who is coming to give death to the suitors.' And I awoke,
and went to see to my fowls if they were alive, whom I found eating wheat
from their troughs, all well and safe as before my dream."

Then said Ulysses, "This dream can endure no other interpretation than
that which the hawk gave to it, who is your lord, and who is coming
quickly to effect all that his words told you."

"Your words," she said, "my old guest, are so sweet that would you sit and
please me with your speech, my ears would never let my eyes close their
spheres for very joy of your discourse; but none that is merely mortal can
live without the death of sleep, so the gods who are without death
themselves have ordained it, to keep the memory of our mortality in our
minds, while we experience that as much as we live we die every day; in
which consideration I will ascend my bed, which I have nightly watered
with my tears since he that was the joy of it departed for that bad
city"--she so speaking because she could not bring her lips to name the
name of Troy so much hated. So for that night they parted, Penelope to
her bed and Ulysses to his son, and to the armour and the lances in the
hall, where they sat up all night cleaning and watching by the armour.




CHAPTER TEN

The Madness from Above.--The Bow of Ulysses.--The Slaughter.--The
Conclusion.


When daylight appeared, a tumultuous concourse of the suitors again filled
the hall; and some wondered, and some inquired what meant that glittering
store of armour and lances which lay in heaps by the entry of the door;
and to all that asked Telemachus made reply that he had caused them to be
taken down to cleanse them of the rust and of the stain which they had
contracted by lying so long unused, even ever since his father went for
Troy; and with that answer their minds were easily satisfied. So to their
feasting and vain rioting again they fell. Ulysses, by Telemachus's order,
had a seat and a mess assigned him in the doorway, and he had his eye ever
on the lances. And it moved gall in some of the great ones there present
to have their feast still dulled with the society of that wretched beggar
as they deemed him, and they reviled and spurned at him with their feet.
Only there was one Philaetius, who had something a better nature than the
rest, that spake kindly to him, and had his age in respect. He, coming up
to Ulysses, took him by the hand with a kind of fear, as if touched
exceedingly with imagination of his great worth, and said thus to him,
"Hail father stranger! my brows have sweat to see the injuries which you
have received, and my eyes have broke forth in tears, when I have only
thought that, such being oftentimes the lot of worthiest men, to this
plight Ulysses may be reduced, and that he now may wander from place to
place as you do; for such who are compelled by need to range here and
there, and have no firm home to fix their feet upon, God keeps them in
this earth as under water; so are they kept down and depressed. And a dark
thread is sometimes spun in the fates of kings."

At this bare likening of the beggar to Ulysses, Minerva from heaven made
the suitors for foolish joy to go mad, and roused them to such a laughter
as would never stop--they laughed without power of ceasing, their eyes
stood full of tears for violent joys; but fears and horrible misgivings
succeeded; and one among them stood up and prophesied: "Ah, wretches!" he
said, "what madness from heaven has seized you, that you can laugh? see
you not that your meat drops blood? a night, like the night of death,
wraps you about; you shriek without knowing it; your eyes thrust forth
tears; the fixed walls, and the beam that bears the whole house up, fall
blood; ghosts choke up the entry; full is the hall with apparitions of
murdered men; under your feet is hell; the sun falls from heaven, and it
is midnight at noon." But like men whom the gods had infatuated to their
destruction, they mocked at his fears, and Eurymachus said, "This man is
surely mad; conduct him forth into the market-place, set him in the light,
for he dreams that 'tis night within the house."

But Theoclymenus (for that was the prophet's name), whom Minerva had
graced with a prophetic spirit, that he foreseeing might avoid the
destruction which awaited them, answered and said: "Eurymachus, I will not
require a guide of thee, for I have eyes and ears, the use of both my
feet, and a sane mind within me, and with these I will go forth of the
doors, because I know the imminent evils which await all you that stay, by
reason of this poor guest who is a favourite with all the gods." So
saying, he turned his back upon those inhospitable men, and went away
home, and never returned to the palace.

These words which he spoke were not unheard by Telemachus, who kept still
his eye upon his father, expecting fervently when he would give the sign
which was to precede the slaughter of the suitors.

They, dreaming of no such thing, fell sweetly to their dinner, as joying
in the great store of banquet which was heaped in full tables about them;
but there reigned not a bitterer banquet planet in all heaven than that
which hung over them this day by secret destination of Minerva.

There was a bow which Ulysses left when he went for Troy. It had lain by
since that time, out of use and unstrung, for no man had strength to draw
that bow, save Ulysses. So it had remained, as a monument of the great
strength of its master. This bow, with the quiver of arrows belonging
thereto, Telemachus had brought down from the armoury on the last night
along with the lances; and now Minerva, intending to do Ulysses an honour,
put it into the mind of Telemachus to propose to the suitors to try who
was strongest to draw that bow; and he promised that to the man who should
be able to draw that bow his mother should be given in marriage--Ulysses's
wife the prize to him who should bend the bow of Ulysses.

There was great strife and emulation stirred up among the suitors at those
words of the prince Telemachus. And to grace her son's words, and to
confirm the promise which he had made, Penelope came and showed herself
that day to the suitors; and Minerva made her that she appeared never so
comely in their sight as that day, and they were inflamed with the
beholding of so much beauty, proposed as the price of so great manhood;
and they cried out that if all those heroes who sailed to Colchis for the
rich purchase of the golden-fleeced ram had seen earth's richer prize,
Penelope, they would not have made their voyage, but would have vowed
their valours and their lives to her, for she was at all parts faultless.

And she said, "The gods have taken my beauty from me, since my lord went
for Troy." But Telemachus willed his mother to depart and not be present
at that contest; for he said, "It may be, some rougher strife shall chance
of this than may be expedient for a woman to witness." And she retired,
she and her maids, and left the hall.

Then the bow was brought into the midst, and a mark was set up by prince
Telemachus; and lord Antinous, as the chief among the suitors, had the
first offer; and he took the bow, and, fitting an arrow to the string, he
strove to bend it, but not with all his might and main could he once draw
together the ends of that tough bow; and when he found how vain a thing it
was to endeavour to draw Ulysses's bow, he desisted, blushing for shame
and for mere anger. Then Eurymachus adventured, but with no better
success; but as it had torn the hands of Antinous, so did the bow tear and
strain his hands, and marred his delicate fingers, yet could he not once
stir the string. Then called he to the attendants to bring fat and
unctuous matter, which melting at the fire, he dipped the bow therein,
thinking to supple it and make it more pliable; but not with all the helps
of art could he succeed in making it to move. After him Liodes, and
Amphinomus, and Polybus, and Eurynomus, and Polyctorides essayed their
strength, but not any one of them, or of the rest of those aspiring
suitors, had any better luck; yet not the meanest of them there but
thought himself well worthy of Ulysses's wife, though to shoot with
Ulysses's bow the completest champion among them was by proof found too
feeble.

Then Ulysses prayed that he might have leave to try; and immediately a
clamour was raised among the suitors, because of his petition, and they
scorned and swelled with rage at his presumption, and that a beggar should
seek to contend in a game of such noble mastery. But Telemachus ordered
that the bow should be given him, and that he should have leave to try,
since they had failed; "for," he said, "the bow is mine, to give or to
withhold;" and none durst gainsay the prince.

Then Ulysses gave a sign to his son, and he commanded the doors of the
hall to be made fast, and all wondered at his words, but none could divine
the cause. And Ulysses took the bow into his hands, and before he essayed
to bend it, he surveyed it at all parts, to see whether, by long lying by,
it had contracted any stiffness which hindered the drawing; and as he was
busied in the curious surveying of his bow, some of the suitors mocked
him, and said, "Past doubt this man is a right cunning archer, and knows
his craft well. See how he turns it over and over, and looks into it, as
if he could see through the wood." And others said, "We wish some one
would tell out gold into our laps but for so long a time as he shall be in
drawing of that string." But when he had spent some little time in making
proof of the bow, and had found it to be in good plight, like as a harper
in tuning of his harp draws out a string, with such ease or much more did
Ulysses draw to the head the string of his own tough bow, and in letting
of it go, it twanged with such a shrill noise as a swallow makes when it
sings through the air; which so much amazed the suitors that their colours
came and went, and the skies gave out a noise of thunder, which at heart
cheered Ulysses, for he knew that now his long labours by the disposal of
the Fates drew to an end. Then fitted he an arrow to the bow, and drawing
it to the head, he sent it right to the mark which the prince had set up.
Which done, he said to Telemachus, "You have got no disgrace yet by your
guest, for I have struck the mark I shot at, and gave myself no such
trouble in teasing the bow with fat and fire as these men did, but have
made proof that my strength is not impaired, nor my age so weak and
contemptible as these were pleased to think it. But come, the day going
down calls us to supper, after which succeed poem and harp, and all
delights which use to crown princely banquetings."

So saying, he beckoned to his son, who straight girt his sword to his
side, and took one of the lances (of which there lay great store from the
armoury) in his hand, and armed at all points advanced towards his father.

The upper rags which Ulysses wore fell from his shoulder, and his own
kingly likeness returned, when he rushed to the great hall door with bow
and quiver full of shafts, which down at his feet he poured, and in bitter
words presignified his deadly intent to the suitors. "Thus far," he said,
"this contest has been decided harmless: now for us there rests another
mark, harder to hit, but which my hands shall essay notwithstanding, if
Phoebus, god of archers, be pleased to give me the mastery." With that he
let fly a deadly arrow at Antinous, which pierced him in the throat, as he
was in the act of lifting a cup of wine to his mouth. Amazement seized the
suitors, as their great champion fell dead, and they raged highly against
Ulysses, and said that it should prove the dearest shaft which he ever let
fly, for he had slain a man whose like breathed not in any part of the
kingdom; and they flew to their arms, and would have seized the lances,
but Minerva struck them with dimness of sight that they went erring up and
down the hall, not knowing where to find them. Yet so infatuated were they
by the displeasure of Heaven that they did not see the imminent peril
which impended over them, but every man believed that this accident had
happened beside the intention of the doer. Fools! to think by shutting
their eyes to evade destiny, or that any other cup remained for them but
that which their great Antinous had tasted!

Then Ulysses revealed himself to all in that presence, and that he was the
man whom they held to be dead at Troy, whose palace they had usurped,
whose wife in his lifetime they had sought in impious marriage, and that
for this reason destruction was come upon them. And he dealt his deadly
arrows among them, and there was no avoiding him, nor escaping from his
horrid person; and Telemachus by his side plied them thick with those
murderous lances from which there was no retreat, till fear itself made
them valiant, and danger gave them eyes to understand the peril; then they
which had swords drew them, and some with shields, that could find them,
and some with tables and benches snatched up in haste, rose in a mass to
overwhelm and crush those two; yet they singly bestirred themselves like
men, and defended themselves against that great host, and through tables,
shields, and all, right through the arrows of Ulysses clove, and the
irresistible lances of Telemachus; and many lay dead, and all had wounds,
and Minerva in the likeness of a bird sat upon the beam which went across
the hall, clapping her wings with a fearful noise; and sometimes the great
bird would fly among them, cuffing at the swords and at the lances, and up
and down the hall would go, beating her wings, and troubling everything,
that it was frightful to behold, and it frayed the blood from the cheeks
of those heaven-hated suitors; but to Ulysses and his son she appeared in
her own divine similitude, with her snake-fringed shield, a goddess armed,
fighting their battles. Nor did that dreadful pair desist till they had
laid all their foes at their feet. At their feet they lay in shoals: like
fishes, when the fishermen break up their nets, so they lay gasping and
sprawling at the feet of Ulysses and his son. And Ulysses remembered the
prediction of Tiresias, which said that he was to perish by his own
guests, unless he slew those who knew him not.

[Illustration: _Rose in a mass to overwhelm and crush those two_.]

Then certain of the queen's household went up and told Penelope what had
happened, and how her lord Ulysses was come home, and had slain the
suitors. But she gave no heed to their words, but thought that some frenzy
possessed them, or that they mocked her; for it is the property of such
extremes of sorrow as she had felt not to believe when any great joy
cometh. And she rated and chid them exceedingly for troubling her. But
they the more persisted in their asseverations of the truth of what they
had affirmed; and some of them had seen the slaughtered bodies of the
suitors dragged forth of the hall. And they said, "That poor guest whom
you talked with last night was Ulysses." Then she was yet more fully
persuaded that they mocked her, and she wept. But they said, "This thing
is true which we have told. We sat within, in an inner room in the palace,
and the doors of the hall were shut on us, but we heard the cries and the
groans of the men that were killed, but saw nothing, till at length your
son called to us to come in, and entering we saw Ulysses standing in the
midst of the slaughtered." But she, persisting in her unbelief, said that
it was some god which had deceived them to think it was the person of
Ulysses.

By this time Telemachus and his father had cleansed their hands from the
slaughter, and were come to where the queen was talking with those of her
household; and when she saw Ulysses, she stood motionless, and had no
power to speak, sudden surprise and joy and fear and many passions so
strove within her. Sometimes she was clear that it was her husband that
she saw, and sometimes the alteration which twenty years had made in his
person (yet that was not much) perplexed her that she knew not what to
think, and for joy she could not believe, and yet for joy she would not
but believe; and, above all, that sudden change from a beggar to a king
troubled her, and wrought uneasy scruples in her mind. But Telemachus,
seeing her strangeness, blamed her, and called her an ungentle and
tyrannous mother; and said that she showed a too great curiousness of
modesty, to abstain from embracing his father, and to have doubts of his
person, when to all present it was evident that he was the very real and
true Ulysses.

Then she mistrusted no longer, but ran and fell upon Ulysses's neck, and
said, "Let not my husband be angry, that I held off so long with strange
delays; it is the gods, who severing us for so long time, have caused this
unseemly distance in me. If Menelaus's wife had used half my caution, she
would never have taken so freely to a stranger's bed; and she might have
spared us all these plagues which have come upon us through her shameless
deed."

These words with which Penelope excused herself wrought more affection in
Ulysses than if upon a first sight she had given up herself implicitly to
his embraces; and he wept for joy to possess a wife so discreet, so
answering to his own staid mind, that had a depth of wit proportioned to
his own, and one that held chaste virtue at so high a price; and he
thought the possession of such a one cheaply purchased with the loss of
all Circe's delights and Calypso's immortality of joys; and his long
labours and his severe sufferings past seemed as nothing, now they were
crowned with the enjoyment of his virtuous and true wife Penelope. And as
sad men at sea whose ship has gone to pieces nigh shore, swimming for
their lives, all drenched in foam and brine, crawl up to some poor patch
of land, which they take possession of with as great a joy as if they had
the world given them in fee, with such delight did this chaste wife cling
to her lord restored, till the dark night fast coming on reminded her of
that more intimate and happy union when in her long-widowed bed she should
once again clasp a living Ulysses.

So from that time the land had rest from the suitors. And the happy
Ithacans with songs and solemn sacrifices of praise to the gods celebrated
the return of Ulysses; for he that had been so long absent was returned to
wreak the evil upon the heads of the doers; in the place where they had
done the evil, there wreaked he his vengeance upon them.










End of Project Gutenberg's The Adventures of Ulysses, by Charles Lamb

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ADVENTURES OF ULYSSES ***

***** This file should be named 7768.txt or 7768.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/7/7/6/7768/

Produced by Anne Soulard, Juliet Sutherland, Charles
Bidwell, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.