VOYAGER'S TALES,

FROM THE COLLECTIONS OF RICHARD HAKLUYT.




INTRODUCTION.

Richard Hakluyt, notwithstanding the Dutch look of his name, was of a
good British stock, from Wales or the Welsh borders.  At the beginning
of the fourteenth century an ancestor of his, Hugo Hakelute, sat in
Parliament as member for Leominster.

Richard Hakluyt, born about five years before the accession of Queen
Elizabeth, was a boy at Westminster School, when visits to a cousin in
the Middle Temple, also a Richard Hakluyt, first planted in him an
enthusiasm for the study of adventure towards a wider use and knowledge
of the globe we live upon.  As a student at Christ Church, Oxford, all
his leisure was spent on the collection and reading of accounts of
voyage and adventure.  He graduated as B. A. in 1574, as M. A. in 1577,
and lectured publicly upon geography, showing "both the old imperfectly
composed, and the new lately reformed maps, globes, spheres, and other
instruments of this art."

In 1582 Hakluyt, at the age of about twenty-nine, issued his first
publication:  "Divers Voyages touching the Discovery of America and the
Lands adjacent unto the same, made first of all by our Englishmen, and
afterwards by the Frenchmen and Bretons:  and certain Notes of
Advertisements for Observations, necessary for such as shall hereafter
make the like Attempt."  His researches had already made him the
personal friend of the famous sea captains of Elizabeth's reign.  In
1583 he had taken orders, and went to Paris as chaplain to the English
ambassador, Sir Edward Stafford.  From Paris he returned to England for
a short time, in 1584, and laid before the Queen a paper recommending
the plantation of unsettled parts of America.  It was called "A
particular Discourse concerning Western Discoveries, written in the
year 1584, by Richard Hakluyt, of Oxford, at the request and direction
of the right worshipful Mr. Walter Raleigh, before the coming home of
his two barks."  Raleigh and Hakluyt were within a year of the same
age.

To found a colonial empire in America by settling upon new lands, and
by dispossessing Spaniards, was one of the grand ideas of Walter
Raleigh, who obtained, on the 25th of March in that year, 1584, a
patent authorising him to search out and take possession of new lands
in the Western world.  He then fitted out two ships, which left England
on the 27th of April, under the command of Philip Amadas and Arthur
Barlow.  In June they had reached the West Indies, then they sailed
north by the coasts of Florida and Carolina, and they had with them two
natives when they returned to England in September, 1584.  In December
Raleigh's patent was enlarged and confirmed, and presently afterwards
Raleigh was knighted.

Richard Hakluyt's paper, in aid of this beginning of the shaping of
another England in the New World, was for a long time lost.  It was
first printed in 1877 at Cambridge, Massachusetts, among the
Collections of the Maine Historical Society.  It won for its author a
promise of the next vacant prebend at Bristol; the vacancy came about a
year later, and the Rev. Richard Hakluyt was admitted to it in 1586.

Hakluyt remained about five years at Paris as Chaplain to the English
Embassy, and while there he caused the publication in 1586 of an
account by Laudonniere of voyages into Florida.  This he also
translated and published, in London, in 1587, as "A Notable History
containing Four Voyages made by certain French Captains into Florida."
In 1588 Hakluyt returned to England, and in the next year, 1589, he
published in one folio volume, "The Principal Navigations, Voyages, and
Discoveries of the English Nation."  In April of the next year he
became rector of Witheringsett-cum-Brockford, in Suffolk.  The full
development of his work appeared in three volumes folio in the years
1598, 1599, and 1600, as "The Principal Navigations, Voyages, Traffics,
and Discoveries of the English Nation," the first of these volumes
differing materially from the volume that had appeared in 1589.

Hakluyt became, in May, 1602, prebendary, and in 1603 archdeacon of
Westminster.  He was twice married, died about six months after
Shakespeare, and was buried in Westminster Abbey on the 26th of
November, 1616.

H. M.




VOYAGERS' TALES.



THE WORTHY ENTERPRISE OF JOHN FOX, AN ENGLISHMAN, IN DELIVERING 266
CHRISTIANS OUT OF THE CAPTIVITY OF THE TURKS AT ALEXANDRIA, THE 3RD OF
JANUARY, 1577.

Among our merchants here in England, it is a common voyage to traffic
to Spain; whereunto a ship called the Three Half Moons, manned with
eight and thirty men, well fenced with munitions, the better to
encounter their enemies withal, and having wind and tide, set from
Portsmouth 1563, and bended her journey towards Seville, a city in
Spain, intending there to traffic with them.  And falling near the
Straits, they perceived themselves to be beset round about with eight
galleys of the Turks, in such wise that there was no way for them to
fly or to escape away, but that either they must yield or else be sunk,
which the owner perceiving, manfully encouraged his company, exhorting
them valiantly to show their manhood, showing them that God was their
God, and not their enemies', requesting them also not to faint in
seeing such a heap of their enemies ready to devour them; putting them
in mind also, that if it were God's pleasure to give them into their
enemies' hands, it was not they that ought to show one displeasant look
or countenance there against; but to take it patiently, and not to
prescribe a day and time for their deliverance, as the citizens of
Bethulia did, but to put themselves under His mercy.  And again, if it
were His mind and good will to show His mighty power by them, if their
enemies were ten times so many, they were not able to stand in their
hands; putting them, likewise, in mind of the old and ancient
worthiness of their countrymen, who in the hardest extremities have
always most prevailed, and gone away conquerors; yea, and where it hath
been almost impossible.  "Such," quoth he, "hath been the valiantness
of our countrymen, and such hath been the mighty power of our God."

With such other like encouragements, exhorting them to behave
themselves manfully, they fell all on their knees, making their prayers
briefly unto God; who, being all risen up again, perceived their
enemies, by their signs and defiances, bent to the spoil, whose mercy
was nothing else but cruelty; whereupon every man took him to his
weapon.

Then stood up one Grove, the master, being a comely man, with his sword
and target, holding them up in defiance against his enemies.  So
likewise stood up the owner, the master's mate, boatswain, purser, and
every man well appointed.  Now likewise sounded up the drums, trumpets,
and flutes, which would have encouraged any man, had he never so little
heart or courage in him.

Then taketh him to his charge John Fox, the gunner, in the disposing of
his pieces, in order to the best effect, and, sending his bullets
towards the Turks, who likewise bestowed their pieces thrice as fast
towards the Christians.  But shortly they drew near, so that the bowmen
fell to their charge in sending forth their arrows so thick amongst the
galleys, and also in doubling their shot so sore upon the galleys, that
there were twice so many of the Turks slain as the number of the
Christians were in all.  But the Turks discharged twice as fast against
the Christians, and so long, that the ship was very sore stricken and
bruised under water; which the Turks, perceiving, made the more haste
to come aboard the ship:  which, ere they could do, many a Turk bought
it dearly with the loss of their lives.  Yet was all in vain; boarded
they were, where they found so hot a skirmish, that it had been better
they had not meddled with the feast; for the Englishmen showed
themselves men indeed, in working manfully with their brown bills and
halberds, where the owner, master, boatswain, and their company stood
to it so lustily, that the Turks were half dismayed.  But chiefly the
boatswain showed himself valiant above the rest, for he fared amongst
the Turks like a wood lion; for there was none of them that either
could or durst stand in his face, till at last there came a shot from
the Turks which brake his whistle asunder, and smote him on the breast,
so that he fell down, bidding them farewell, and to be of good comfort,
encouraging them, likewise, to win praise by death, rather than to live
captives in misery and shame, which they, hearing, indeed, intended to
have done, as it appeared by their skirmish; but the press and store of
the Turks were so great, that they were not long able to endure, but
were so overpressed, that they could not wield their weapons, by reason
whereof they must needs be taken, which none of them intended to have
been, but rather to have died, except only the master's mate, who
shrunk from the skirmish, like a notable coward, esteeming neither the
value of his name, nor accounting of the present example of his
fellows, nor having respect to the miseries whereunto he should be put.
But in fine, so it was, that the Turks were victors, whereof they had
no great cause to rejoice or triumph.  Then would it have grieved any
hard heart to see these infidels so violently entreating the
Christians, not having any respect of their manhood, which they had
tasted of, nor yet respecting their own state, how they might have met
with such a booty as might have given them the overthrow; but no
remorse hereof, or anything else doth bridle their fierce and tyrannous
dealing, but the Christians must needs to the galleys, to serve in new
offices; and they were no sooner in them, but their garments were
pulled over their ears, and torn from their backs, and they set to the
oars.

I will make no mention of their miseries, being now under their
enemies' raging stripes.  I think there is no man will judge their fare
good, or their bodies unloaden of stripes, and not pestered with too
much heat, and also with too much cold; but I will go to my purpose,
which is to show the end of those being in mere misery, which
continually do call on God with a steadfast hope that He will deliver
them, and with a sure faith that He can do it.

Nigh to the city of Alexandria, being a haven town, and under the
dominion of the Turks, there is a road, being made very fencible with
strong walls, whereinto the Turks do customably bring their galleys on
shore every year, in the winter season, and there do trim them, and lay
them up against the spring-time; in which road there is a prison,
wherein the captives and such prisoners as serve in the galleys are put
for all that time, until the seas be calm and passable for the galleys,
every prisoner being most grievously laden with irons on their legs, to
their great pain, and sore disabling of them to any labour; into which
prison were these Christians put and fast warded all the winter season.
But ere it was long, the master and the owner, by means of friends,
were redeemed, the rest abiding still in the misery, while that they
were all, through reason of their ill-usage and worse fare, miserably
starved, saving one John Fox, who (as some men can abide harder and
more misery than other some can, so can some likewise make more shift,
and work more duties to help their state and living, than other some
can do) being somewhat skilful in the craft of a barber, by reason
thereof made great shift in helping his fare now and then with a good
meal.  Insomuch, till at the last God sent him favour in the sight of
the keeper of the prison, so that he had leave to go in and out to the
road at his pleasure, paying a certain stipend unto the keeper, and
wearing a lock about his leg, which liberty likewise five more had upon
like sufferance, who, by reason of their long imprisonment, not being
feared or suspected to start aside, or that they would work the Turks
any mischief, had liberty to go in and out at the said road, in such
manner as this John Fox did, with irons on their legs, and to return
again at night.

In the year of our Lord 1577, in the winter season, the galleys happily
coming to their accustomed harbourage, and being discharged of all
their masts, sails, and other such furnitures as unto galleys do
appertain, and all the masters and mariners of them being then nested
in their own homes, there remained in the prison of the said road two
hundred three score and eight Christian prisoners who had been taken by
the Turks' force, and were of fifteen sundry nations.  Among which
there were three Englishmen, whereof one was named John Fox, of
Woodbridge, in Suffolk, the other William Wickney, of Portsmouth, in
the county of Southampton, and the third Robert Moore, of Harwich, in
the county of Essex; which John Fox, having been thirteen or fourteen
years under their gentle entreatance, and being too weary thereof,
minding his escape, weighed with himself by what means it might be
brought to pass, and continually pondering with himself thereof, took a
good heart unto him, in the hope that God would not be always scourging
His children, and never ceasing to pray Him to further his intended
enterprise, if that it should redound to His glory.

Not far from the road, and somewhat from thence, at one side of the
city, there was a certain victualling house, which one Peter Vuticaro
had hired, paying also a certain fee unto the keeper of the road.  This
Peter Vuticaro was a Spaniard born, and a Christian, and had been
prisoner above thirty years, and never practised any means to escape,
but kept himself quiet without touch or suspect of any conspiracy,
until that now this John Fox using much thither, they brake one to
another their minds, concerning the restraint of their liberty and
imprisonment.  So that this John Fox, at length opening unto this
Vuticaro the device which he would fain put in practice, made privy one
more to this their intent; which three debated of this matter at such
times as they could compass to meet together, insomuch that, at seven
weeks' end they had sufficiently concluded how the matter should be, if
it pleased God to further them thereto; who, making five more privy to
this their device, whom they thought that they might safely trust,
determined in three nights after to accomplish their deliberate
purpose.  Whereupon the same John Fox and Peter Vuticaro, and the other
five appointed to meet all together in the prison the next day, being
the last day of December, where this John Fox certified the rest of the
prisoners what their intent and device was, and how and when they
minded to bring that purpose to pass, who thereunto persuaded them
without much ado to further their device; which, the same John Fox
seeing, delivered unto them a sort of files, which he had gathered
together for this purpose by the means of Peter Vuticaro, charging them
that every man should be ready, discharged of his irons, by eight of
the clock on the next day at night.

On the next day at night, the said John Fox, and his five other
companions, being all come to the house of Peter Vuticaro, passing the
time away in mirth for fear of suspect till the night came on, so that
it was time for them to put in practice their device, sent Peter
Vuticaro to the master of the road, in the name of one of the masters
of the city, with whom this keeper was acquainted, and at whose request
he also would come at the first; who desired him to take the pains to
meet him there, promising him that he would bring him back again.  The
keeper agreed to go with him, asking the warders not to bar the gate,
saying that he would not stay long, but would come again with all
speed.

In the mean-season, the other seven had provided them of such weapons
as they could get in that house, and John Fox took him to an old rusty
sword-blade without either hilt or pommel, which he made to serve his
turn in bending the hand end of the sword instead of a pommel, and the
other had got such spits and glaves as they found in the house.

The keeper being now come unto the house, and perceiving no light nor
hearing any noise, straightway suspected the matter; and returning
backward, John Fox, standing behind the corner of the house, stepped
forth unto him; who, perceiving it to be John Fox, said, "O Fox, what
have I deserved of thee that thou shouldest seek my death?"

"Thou villain," quoth Fox, "hast been a bloodsucker of many a
Christian's blood, and now thou shalt know what thou hast deserved at
my hands," wherewith he lift up his bright shining sword of ten years'
rust, and stroke him so main a blow, as therewithal his head clave
asunder so that he fell stark dead to the ground.  Whereupon Peter
Vuticaro went in and certified the rest how the case stood with the
keeper, and they came presently forth, and some with their spits ran
him through, and the other with their glaves hewed him in sunder, cut
off his head, and mangled him so that no man should discern what he
was.

Then marched they toward the road, whereinto they entered softly, where
were five warders, whom one of them asked, saying, who was there?
Quoth Fox and his company, "All friends."  Which when they were all
within proved contrary; for, quoth Fox, "My masters, here is not to
every man a man, wherefore look you, play your parts."  Who so behaved
themselves indeed, that they had despatched these five quickly.  Then
John Fox, intending not to be barren of his enterprise, and minding to
work surely in that which he went about, barred the gate surely, and
planted a cannon against it.

Then entered they into the jailer's lodge, where they found the keys of
the fortress and prison by his bedside, and there got they all better
weapons.  In this chamber was a chest wherein was a rich treasure, and
all in ducats, which this Peter Vuticaro and two more opening, stuffed
themselves so full as they could between their shirts and their skin;
which John Fox would not once touch and said, "that it was his and
their liberty which he fought for, to the honour of his God, and not to
make a mart of the wicked treasure of the infidels."  Yet did these
words sink nothing unto their stomachs; they did it for a good intent.
So did Saul save the fattest oxen to offer unto the Lord, and they to
serve their own turn.  But neither did Saul scape the wrath of God
therefor, neither had these that thing which they desired so, and did
thirst after.  Such is God's justice.  He that they put their trust in
to deliver them from the tyrannous hands of their enemies, he, I say,
could supply their want of necessaries.

Now these eight, being armed with such weapons as they thought well of,
thinking themselves sufficient champions to encounter a stronger enemy,
and coming unto the prison, Fox opened the gates and doors thereof, and
called forth all the prisoners, whom he set, some to ramming up the
gate, some to the dressing up of a certain galley which was the best in
all the road, and was called "The Captain of Alexandria," whereinto
some carried masts, sails, oars, and other such furniture, as doth
belong unto a galley.

At the prison were certain warders whom John Fox and his company slew,
in the killing of whom there were eight more of the Turks which
perceived them, and got them to the top of the prison, unto whom John
Fox and his company were fain to come by ladders, where they found a
hot skirmish, for some of them were there slain, some wounded, and some
but scarred and not hurt.  As John Fox was thrice shot through his
apparel, and not hurt, Peter Vuticaro and the other two, that had armed
them with the ducats, were slain, as not able to wield themselves,
being so pestered with the weight and uneasy carrying of the wicked and
profane treasure; and also divers Christians were as well hurt about
that skirmish as Turks slain.

Amongst the Turks was one thrust through, who (let us not say that it
was ill-fortune) fell off from the top of the prison wall, and made
such a groaning that the inhabitants thereabout (as here and there
stood a house or two), came and questioned him, so that they understood
the case, how that the prisoners were paying their ransoms; wherewith
they raised both Alexandria, which lay on the west side of the road,
and a castle which was at the city's end next to the road, and also
another fortress which lay on the north side of the road, so that now
they had no way to escape but one, which by man's reason (the two holds
lying so upon the mouth of the road) might seem impossible to be a way
for them.  So was the Red Sea impossible for the Israelites to pass
through, the hills and rocks lay so on the one side, and their enemies
compassed them on the other.  So was it impossible that the walls of
Jericho should fall down, being neither undermined nor yet rammed at
with engines, nor yet any man's wisdom, policy, or help, set or put
thereunto.  Such impossibilities can our God make possible.  He that
held the lion's jaws from rending Daniel asunder, yea, or yet from once
touching him to his hurt, cannot He hold the roaring cannons of this
hellish force?  He that kept the fire's rage in the hot burning oven
from the three children that praised His name, cannot He keep the
fire's flaming blasts from among His elect?

Now is the road fraught with lusty soldiers, labourers, and mariners,
who are fain to stand to their tackling, in setting to every man his
hand, some to the carrying in of victuals, some munitions, some oars,
and some one thing some another, but most are keeping their enemy from
the wall of the road.  But to be short, there was no time misspent, no
man idle, nor any man's labour ill-bestowed or in vain.  So that in
short time this galley was ready trimmed up.  Whereinto every man
leaped in all haste, hoisting up the sails lustily, yielding themselves
to His mercy and grace, in Whose hands is both wind and weather.

Now is this galley a-float, and out of the shelter of the road; now
have the two castles full power upon the galley; now is there no remedy
but to sink.  How can it be avoided?  The cannons let fly from both
sides, and the galley is even in the middest and between them both.
What man can devise to save it?  There is no man but would think it
must needs be sunk.

There was not one of them that feared the shot which went thundering
round about their ears, nor yet were once scarred or touched with five
and forty shot which came from the castles.  Here did God hold forth
His buckler, He shieldeth now this galley, and hath tried their faith
to the uttermost.  Now cometh His special help; yea, even when man
thinks them past all help, then cometh He Himself down from Heaven with
His mighty power, then is His present remedy most ready.  For they sail
away, being not once touched by the glance of a shot, and are quickly
out of the Turkish cannons' reach.  Then might they see them coming
down by heaps to the water's side, in companies like unto swarms of
bees, making show to come after them with galleys, bustling themselves
to dress up the galleys, which would be a swift piece of work for them
to do, for that they had neither oars, masts, sails, nor anything else
ready in any galley.  But yet they are carrying into them, some into
one galley, and some into another, so that, being such a confusion
amongst them, without any certain guide, it were a thing impossible to
overtake the Christians; beside that, there was no man that would take
charge of a galley, the weather was so rough, and there was such an
amazedness amongst them.  And verily, I think their god was amazed
thereat; it could not be but that he must blush for shame, he can speak
never a word for dulness, much less can he help them in such an
extremity.  Well, howsoever it is, he is very much to blame to suffer
them to receive such a gibe.  But howsoever their god behaved himself,
our God showed Himself a God indeed, and that He was the only living
God; for the seas were swift under His faithful, which made the enemies
aghast to behold them; a skilfuller pilot leads them, and their
mariners bestir them lustily; but the Turks had neither mariners,
pilot, nor any skilful master, that was in readiness at this pinch.

When the Christians were safe out of the enemy's coast, John Fox called
to them all, telling them to be thankful unto Almighty God for their
delivery, and most humbly to fall down upon their knees, beseeching Him
to aid them to their friends' land, and not to bring them into another
danger, since He had most mightily delivered them from so great a
thraldom and bondage.

Thus when every man had made his petition, they fell straightway to
their labour with the oars, in helping one another when they were
wearied, and with great labour striving to come to some Christian land,
as near as they could guess by the stars.  But the winds were so
contrary, one while driving them this way, another while that way, so
that they were now in a new maze, thinking that God had forsaken them
and left them to a greater danger.  And forasmuch as there were no
victuals now left in the galley, it might have been a cause to them (if
they had been the Israelites), to have murmured against their God; but
they knew how that their God, who had delivered Egypt, was such a
loving and merciful God, as that He would not suffer them to be
confounded in whom He had wrought so great a wonder, but what calamity
soever they sustained, they knew it was but for their further trial,
and also (in putting them in mind of their further misery), to cause
them not to triumph and glory in themselves therefor.  Having, I say,
no victuals in the galley, it might seem one misery continually to fall
upon another's neck; but to be brief the famine grew to be so great
that in twenty-eight days, wherein they were on the sea, there died
eight persons, to the astonishment of all the rest.

So it fell out that upon the twenty-ninth day after they set from
Alexandria, they fell on the isle of Candia, and landed at Gallipoli,
where they were made much of by the abbot and monks there, who caused
them to stay there while they were well refreshed and eased.  They kept
there the sword wherewith John Fox had killed the keeper, esteeming it
as a most precious relic, and hung it up for a monument.

When they thought good, having leave to depart from thence, they sailed
along the coast till they arrived at Tarento, where they sold their
galley, and divided it, every man having a part thereof.  The Turks on
receiving so shameful a foil at their hands, pursued the Christians,
and scoured the seas, where they could imagine that they had bent their
course.  And the Christians had departed from thence on the one day in
the morning and seven galleys of the Turks came thither that night, as
it was certified by those who followed Fox and his company, fearing
lest they should have been met with.  And then they came afoot to
Naples, where they departed asunder, every man taking him to his next
way home.  From whence John Fox took his journey unto Rome, where he
was well entertained by an Englishman who presented his worthy deed
unto the Pope, who rewarded him liberally, and gave him letters unto
the King of Spain, where he was very well entertained of him there, who
for this his most worthy enterprise gave him in fee twenty pence a day.
From whence, being desirous to come into his own country, he came
thither at such time as he conveniently could, which was in the year of
our Lord God 1579; who being come into England went unto the Court, and
showed all his travel unto the Council, who considering of the state of
this man, in that he had spent and lost a great part of his youth in
thraldom and bondage, extended to him their liberality to help to
maintain him now in age, to their right honour and to the encouragement
of all true-hearted Christians.



THE COPY OF THE CERTIFICATE FOR JOHN FOX AND HIS COMPANY, MADE BY THE
PRIOR AND THE BRETHREN OF GALLIPOLI, WHERE THEY FIRST LANDED.

We, the Prior and Fathers of the Convent of the Amerciates, of the city
of Gallipoli, of the order of Preachers, do testify that upon the 29th
of January last past, 1577, there came into the said city a certain
galley from Alexandria, taken from the Turks, with two hundred and
fifty-eight Christians, whereof was principal Master John Fox, an
Englishman, a gunner, and one of the chiefest that did accomplish that
great work, whereby so many Christians have recovered their liberties,
in token and remembrance whereof, upon our earnest request to the same
John Fox, he has left here an old sword, wherewith he slew the keeper
of the prison, which sword we do as a monument and memorial of so
worthy a deed, hang up in the chief place of our convent house.  And
for because all things aforesaid, are such as we will testify to be
true, as they are orderly passed, and have therefore good credit, that
so much as is above expressed is true, and for the more faith thereof,
we, the Prior and Fathers aforesaid, have ratified and subscribed these
presents.  Given in Gallipoli, the 3rd of February, 1577.

I, Friar VINCENT BARBA, Prior of the same place, confirm the premises,
as they are above written.

I, Friar ALBERT DAMARO, of Gallipoli, sub-prior, confirm as much.

I, Friar ANTHONY CELLELER, of Galli, confirm as aforesaid.

I, Friar BARTLEMEW, of Gallipoli, confirm as above said.

I, Friar FRANCIS, of Gallipoli, confirm as much.



THE BISHOP OF ROME, HIS LETTERS IN BEHALF OF JOHN FOX.

Be it known unto all men, to whom this writing shall come, that the
bringer hereof, John Fox, Englishman, a gunner, after he had served
captive in the Turks' galleys, by the space of fourteen years, at
length, through God his help, taking good opportunity, the 3rd of
January last passed, slew the keeper of the prison (whom he first
stroke on the face) together with four and twenty other Turks, by the
assistance of his fellow-prisoners; and with 266 Christians (of whose
liberty he was the author) launched from Alexandria, and from thence
arrived first at Gallipoli, in Candia, and afterwards at Tarento, in
Apulia; the written testimony and credit of which things, as also of
others, the same John Fox hath in public tables from Naples.

Upon Easter Eve he came to Rome, and is now determined to take his
journey to the Spanish Court, hoping there to obtain some relief
towards his living; wherefore the poor distressed man humbly
beseecheth, and we in his behalf, do in the bowels of Christ, desire
you, that taking compassion of his former captivity and present penury,
you do not only suffer him freely to pass through all your cities and
towns, but also succour him with your charitable alms, the reward
whereof you shall hereafter most assuredly receive, which we hope you
will afford to him, whom with tender affection of pity we commend unto
you.  At Rome, the 20th of April, 1577.

THOMAS GROLOS, Englishman, Bishop of Astraphen.

RICHARD SILLEUN, Prior Angliae.

ANDREAS LUDOVICUS, Register to our Sovereign Lord the Pope, which for
the greater credit of the premises, have set my seal to these presents.
At Rome, the day and year above written.

MAURICIUS CLEMENT, the governor and keeper of the English hospital in
the city.



THE KING OF SPAIN, HIS LETTERS TO THE LIEUTENANT FOR THE PLACING OF
JOHN FOX IN THE OFFICE OF A GUNNER, ETC.

To the illustrious prince, Vespasian Gonsaga Colonna, our Lieutenant
and Captain-General of our realm of Valencia, having consideration that
John Fox, Englishman, hath served us, and was one of the most principal
which took away from the Turks a certain galley, which they have
brought to Taranto, wherein were two hundred and fifty-eight Christian
captives.  We license him to practice, and give him the office of a
gunner, and have ordained that he go to our said realm there to serve
in the said office in the galleys, which by our commandment are lately
made.  And we do command that you cause to be paid to him eight ducats
pay a month, for the time that he shall serve in the said galleys as a
gunner, or till we can otherwise provide for him, the said eight ducats
monthly of the money which is already of our provision, present and to
come, and to have regard of those which come with him.  From Escurial
the 10th of August, 1577.--I, the King,

                                          JUAN DEL GADO.

And under that a confirmation of the Council.



VERSES WRITTEN BY A. M. TO THE COURTEOUS READERS, WHO WAS PRESENT AT
ROME WHEN JOHN FOX RECEIVED HIS LETTERS OF THE POPE.

  Leaving at large all fables vainly used,
  All trifling toys that do no truth import,
  Lo, here how the end (at length) though long diffused,
  Unfoldeth plain a true and rare report;
  To glad those minds which seek their country's wealth,
  By proffered pains to enlarge his happy health.
  At Rome I was, when Fox did there arrive,
  Therefore I may sufficiently express,
  What gallant joy his deeds did there revive
  In the hearts of those which heard his valiantness.
  And how the Pope did recompense his pains,
  And letters gave to move his greater gains.

  But yet I know that many do misdoubt,
  That those his pains are fables and untrue;
  Not only I in this will bear him out,
  But diverse more that did his patents view.
  And unto those so boldly I daresay,
  That nought but truth John Fox doth here bewray;
  Besides here's one was slave with him in thrall,
  Lately returned into our native land,
  This witness can this matter perfect all,
  What needeth more? for witness he may stand.
  And thus I end, unfolding what I know,
  The other man more larger proof can show.
                Honos alit artes,     A. M.


                            -----



THE VOYAGE MADE TO TRIPOLIS IN BARBARY, IN THE YEAR 1584, WITH A SHIP
CALLED THE JESUS, WHEREIN THE ADVENTURES AND DISTRESSES OF SOME
ENGLISHMEN ARE TRULY REPORTED, AND OTHER NECESSARY CIRCUMSTANCES
OBSERVED.  WRITTEN BY THOMAS SANDERS.

This voyage was set forth by the Right Worshipful Sir Edward Osborne
Knight, chief merchant of all the Turkish Company, and one Master
Richard Stapers, the ship being of the burden of one hundred tons,
called the Jesus; she was builded at Farmne, a river by Portsmouth.
The owners were Master Thomas Thompson, Nicholas Carnabie, and John
Gilman.  The master (under God) was one Zaccheus Hellier, of Blackwall,
and his mate was one Richard Morris, of that place; their pilot was one
Anthony Jerado, a Frenchman, of the province of Marseilles; the purser
was one William Thompson, our owner's son; the merchants' factors were
Romaine Sonnings, a Frenchman, and Richard Skegs, servant unto the said
Master Stapers.  The owners were bound unto the merchants by charter
party thereupon in one thousand marks, that the said ship, by God's
permission should go for Tripolis in Barbary, that is to say, first
from Portsmouth to Newhaven in Normandy, thence to S. Lukar, otherwise
called S. Lucas, in Andalusia, and from thence to Tripolis, which is in
the east part of Africa, and so to return unto London.

But here ought every man to note and consider the works of our God,
that (many times) what man doth determine God doth disappoint.  The
said master having some occasion to go to Farmne, took with him the
pilot and the purser, and returning again, by means of a gust of wind,
the boat wherein they were was drowned, the said master, the purser,
and all the company; only the said pilot by experience in swimming
saved himself, these were the beginnings of our sorrows.  After which
the said master's mate would not proceed in that voyage, and the owner
hearing of this misfortune, and the unwillingness of the master's mate,
did send down one Richard Deimond and shipped him for master, who did
choose for his mate one Andrew Dier, and so the said ship departed on
her voyage accordingly; that is to say, about the 16th of October,
1584, she made sail from Portsmouth, and the 18th day then next
following she arrived into Newhaven, where our said last master Deimond
by a surfeit died.  The factors then appointed the said Andrew Dier,
being then master's mate, to be their master for that voyage, who did
choose to be his mates the two quarter-masters of the same ship, to
wit, Peter Austine and Shillabey, and for purser was shipped one
Richard Burges.  Afterward about the 8th day of November we made sail
forthward, and by force of weather we were driven back again into
Portsmouth, where we refreshed our victuals and other necessaries, and
then the wind came fair.  About the 29th day then next following we
departed thence, and the 1st day of December, by means of a contrary
wind, we were driven to Plymouth.  The 18th day then next following we
made forthward again, and by force of weather we were driven to
Falmouth, where we remained until the 1st day of January, at which time
the wind coming fair we departed thence, and about the 20th day of the
said month we arrived safely at S. Lucas.  And about the 9th day of
March next following we made sail from thence, and about the 18th day
of the same month we came to Tripolis in Barbary, where we were very
well entertained by the king of that country and also of the commons.
The commodities of that place are sweet oils; the king there is a
merchant, and the rather (willing to prefer himself before his commons)
requested our said factors to traffic with him, and promised them that
if they would take his oils at his own price they should pay no manner
of custom, and they took of him certain tons of oil; and afterward
perceiving that they might have far better cheap, notwithstanding the
custom free, they desired the king to license them to take the oils at
the pleasure of his commons, for that his price did exceed theirs;
whereunto the king would not agree, but was rather contented to abate
his price, insomuch that the factors bought all their oils of the
king's custom free, and so laded the same aboard.

In the meantime there came to that place one Miles Dickinson, in a ship
of Bristol, who together with our said factors took a house to
themselves there.  Our French factor, Romaine Sonnings, desired to buy
a commodity in the market, and, wanting money, desired the said Miles
Dickinson to lend him a hundred chikinoes until he came to his lodging,
which he did; and afterwards the same Sonnings met with Miles Dickinson
in the street, and delivered him money bound up in a napkin, saying,
"Master Dickinson, there is the money that I borrowed of you," and so
thanked him for the same.  He doubted nothing less than falsehood,
which is seldom known among merchants, and specially being together in
one house, and is the more detestable between Christians, they being in
Turkey among the heathen; the said Dickinson did not tell the money
presently, until he came to his lodging, and then, finding nine
chikinoes lacking of his hundred (which was about three pounds, for
that every chikinoe is worth seven shillings of English money), he came
to the said Romaine Sonnings and delivered him his handkerchief, and
asked him how many chikinoes he had delivered him.  Sonnings answered,
"A hundred"; Dickinson said "No"; and so they protested and swore on
both parts.  But in the end the said Romaine Sonnings did swear deeply
with detestable oaths and curses; and prayed God that he might show his
works on him, that other might take ensample thereby, and that he might
be hanged like a dog, and never come into England again, if he did not
deliver unto the said Dickinson a hundred chikinoes.  And here behold a
notable example of all blasphemers, cursers, and swearers, how God
rewarded him accordingly; for many times it cometh to pass that God
showeth his miracles upon such monstrous blasphemers to the ensample of
others, as now hereafter you shall hear what befell to this Romaine
Sonnings.

There was a man in the said town a pledge, whose name was Patrone
Norado, who the year before had done this Sonnings some pleasure there.
The foresaid Patrone Norado was indebted unto a Turk of that town in
the sum of four hundred and fifty crowns, for certain goods sent by him
into Christendom in a ship of his own, and by his own brother, and
himself remained in Tripolis as pledge until his said brother's return;
and, as the report went there, he came among lewd company, and lost his
brother's said ship and goods at dice, and never returned unto him
again.

The said Patrone Norado, being void of all hope and finding now
opportunity, consulted with the said Sonnings for to swim a-seaboard
the islands, and the ship, being then out of danger, should take him in
(as was afterwards confessed), and so go to Tallowne, in the province
of Marseilles, with this Patrone Norado, and there to take in the rest
of his lading.

The ship being ready the first day of May, and having her sails all
abroad, our said factors did take their leave of the king, who very
courteously bid them farewell, and when they came aboard they commanded
the master and the company hastily to get out the ship.  The master
answered that it was impossible, for that the wind was contrary and
overblowed.  And he required us, upon forfeiture of our bands, that we
should do our endeavour to get her forth.  Then went we to warp out the
ship, and presently the king sent a boat aboard of us, with three men
in her, commanding the said Sonnings to come ashore, at whose coming
the king demanded of him custom for the oils.  Sonnings answered him
that his highness had promised to deliver them customs free.  But,
notwithstanding, the king weighed not his said promise, and as an
infidel that hath not the fear of God before his eyes, nor regard of
his word, albeit he was a king, he caused the said Sonnings to pay the
custom to the uttermost penny; and afterwards ordered him to make haste
away, saying that the janisaries would have the oil ashore again.

These janisaries are soldiers there under the Great Turk, and their
power is above the king's.  And so the said factor departed from the
king, and came to the waterside, and called for a boat to come aboard,
and he brought with him the foresaid Patrone Norado.  The company,
inquisitive to know what man that was, Sonnings answered that he was
his countryman, a passenger.  "I pray God," said the company, "that we
come not into trouble by this man."  Then said Sonnings angrily, "What
have you to do with any matters of mine?  If anything chance otherwise
than well, I must answer for all."

Now the Turk unto whom this Patrone Norado was indebted, missing him,
supposed him to be aboard of our ship, presently went unto the king and
told him that he thought that his pledge, Patrone Norado, was aboard on
the English ship.  Whereupon the king presently sent a boat aboard of
us, with three men in her, commanding the said Sonnings to come ashore;
and, not speaking anything as touching the man, he said that he would
come presently in his own boat; but as soon as they were gone he willed
us to warp forth the ship, and said that he would see the knaves hanged
before he would go ashore.  And when the king saw that he came not
ashore, but still continued warping away the ship, he straight
commanded the gunner of the bulwark next unto us to shoot three shots
without ball.  Then we came all to the said Sonnings, and asked him
what the matter was that we were shot at; he said that it was the
janisaries who would have the oil ashore again, and willed us to make
haste away.  And after that he had discharged three shots without ball
he commanded all the gunners in the town to do their endeavour to sink
us; but the Turkish gunners could not once strike us, wherefore the
king sent presently to the Banio (this Banio is the prison whereas all
the captives lay at night), and promised that if there were any that
could either sink us or else cause us to come in again, he should have
a hundred crown, and his liberty.  With that came forth a Spaniard
called Sebastian, which had been an old servitor in Flanders, and he
said that, upon the performance of that promise, he would undertake
either to sink us or to cause us to come in again, and thereto he would
gage his life; and at the first shot he split our rudder's head in
pieces, and the second shot he struck us under water, and the third
shot he shot us through our foremast with a culverin shot, and thus, he
having rent both our rudder and mast and shot us under water, we were
enforced to go in again.

This Sebastian for all his diligence herein had neither his liberty nor
a hundred crowns, so promised by the said king; but, after his service
done, was committed again to prison, whereby may appear the regard that
a Turk or infidel hath of his work, although he be able to perform
it--yea, more, though he be a king.

Then our merchants, seeing no remedy, they, together with five of our
company, went ashore; and they then ceased shooting.  They shot unto us
in the whole nine-and-thirty shots without the hurt of any man.

And when our merchants came ashore the king commanded presently that
they, with the rest of our company that were with them, should be
chained four and four to a hundredweight of iron, and when we came in
with the ship there came presently above a hundred Turks aboard of us,
and they searched us and stripped our very clothes from our backs, and
broke open our chests, and made a spoil of all that we had; and the
Christian caitiffs likewise that came aboard of us made spoil of our
goods, and used us as ill as the Turks did.  And our master's mate,
having a Geneva Bible in his hand, there came the king's chief gunner
and took it out from him, who showed me of it; and I, having the
language, went presently to the king's treasurer, and told him of it,
saying that since it was the will of God that we should fall into their
hands, yet that they should grant us to use our consciences to our own
discretion, as they suffered the Spaniards and other nations to use
theirs; and he granted us.  Then I told him that the master gunner had
taken away a Bible from one of our men:  the treasurer went presently
and commanded him to deliver up the Bible again, which he did.  And
within a little after he took it from the man again, and I showed the
treasurer of it, and presently he commanded him to deliver it again,
saying, "Thou villain! wilt thou turn to Christianity again?" for he
was a relagado, which is one that was first a Christian and afterwards
becometh a Turk; and so he delivered me the Bible the second time.  And
then I, having it in my hand, the gunner came to me, and spake these
words, saying, "Thou dog!  I will have the book in despite of thee!"
and took it from me, saying, "If you tell the king's treasurer of it
any more, by Mahomet I will be revenged of thee!"  Notwithstanding I
went the third time unto the king's treasurer, and told him of it; and
he came with me, saying thus unto the gunner:  "By the head of the
Great Turk if thou take it from him again thou shalt have a hundred
bastinadoes."  And forthwith he delivered me the book, saying he had
not the value of a pin of the spoil of the ship--which was the better
for him, as hereafter you shall hear; for there was none, either
Christian or Turk, that took the value of a pennyworth of our goods
from us but perished both body and goods within seventeen months
following, as hereafter shall plainly appear.

Then came the guardian Basha, who is the keeper of the king's captives,
to fetch us all ashore; and then I, remembering the miserable estate of
poor distressed captives in the time of their bondage to those
infidels, went to mine own chest, and took out thereof a jar of oil,
and filled a basket full of white ruske, to carry ashore with me.  But
before I came to the Banio the Turkish boys had taken away almost all
my bread, and the keeper said, "Deliver me the jar of oil, and when
thou comest to the Banio thou shalt have it again;" but I never had it
of him any more.

But when I came to the Banio and saw our merchants and all the rest of
our company in chains, and we all ready to receive the same reward,
what heart is there so hard but would have pitied our cause, hearing or
seeing the lamentable greeting there was betwixt us.  All this happened
the first of May, 1584.

And the second day of the same month the king with all his council sat
in judgment upon us.  The first that were had forth to be arraigned
were the factors and the masters, and the king asked them wherefore
they came not ashore when he sent for them.  And Romaine Sonnings
answered that, though he were a king on shore, and might command there,
so was he as touching those that were under him; and therefore said, if
any offence be, the fault is wholly in myself and in no other.  Then
forthwith the king gave judgment that the said Romaine Sonnings should
be hanged over the north-east bulwark, from whence he conveyed the
forenamed Patrone Norado.  And then he called for our master, Andrew
Dier, and used few words to him, and so condemned him to be hanged over
the walls of the westernmost bulwarks.

Then fell our other factor, named Richard Skegs, upon his knees before
the king, and said, "I beseech your highness either to pardon our
master or else suffer me to die for him, for he is ignorant of this
cause."  And then the people of that country, favouring the said
Richard Skegs, besought the king to pardon them both.  So then the king
spake these words:  "Behold, for thy sake I pardon the master."  Then
presently the Turks shouted and cried, saying, "Away with the master
from the presence of the king."  And then he came into the Banio where
we were, and told us what had happened, and we all rejoiced at the good
hap of Master Skegs, that he was saved, and our master for his sake.

But afterwards our joy was turned to double sorrow, for in the meantime
the king's mind was altered:  for that one of his council had advised
him that, unless the master died also, by the law they could not
confiscate the ship nor goods, neither make captive any of the men.
Whereupon the king sent for our master again, and gave him another
judgment after his pardon for one cause, which was that he should be
hanged.  Here all true Christians may see what trust a Christian man
may put in an infidel's promise, who, being a king, pardoned a man now,
as you have heard, and within an hour after hanged him for the same
cause before a whole multitude; and also promised our factors their
oils custom free, and at their going away made them pay the uttermost
penny for the custom thereof.

And when that Romaine Sonnings saw no remedy but that he should die, he
protested to turn Turk, hoping thereby to have saved his life.  Then
said the Turk, "If thou wilt turn Turk, speak the words that thereunto
belong;" and he did so.  Then said they unto him, "Now thou shalt die
in the faith of a Turk;" and so he did, as the Turks reported that were
at his execution; and the forenamed Patrone Norado, whereas before he
had liberty and did nothing, he then was condemned slave perpetual,
except there were payment made of the foresaid sum of money.

Then the king condemned all us, who were in number five and twenty, of
which two were hanged (as you have heard) and one died the first day we
came on shore by the visitation of Almighty God, and the other three
and twenty he condemned slaves perpetually unto the Great Turk, and the
ship and goods were confiscated to the use of the Great Turk; then we
all fell down upon our knees, giving God thanks for this sorrowful
visitation and giving ourselves wholly to the almighty power of God,
unto whom all secrets are known, that He of His goodness would
vouchsafe to look upon us.

Here may all true Christian hearts see the wonderful works of God
showed upon such infidels, blasphemers, and runagate Christians, and so
you shall read in the end of this book of the like upon the unfaithful
king and all his children, and of as many as took any portion of the
said goods.

But first to show our miserable bondage and slavery, and unto what
small pittance and allowance we were tied, for every five men had
allowance but five aspers of bread in a day, which is but twopence
English, and our lodging was to lie on the bare boards, with a very
simple cape to cover us.  We were also forcibly and most violently
shaven, head and beard, and within three days after, I and five more of
my fellows, together with fourscore Italians and Spaniards, were sent
forth in a galiot to take a Greek carmosel, which came into Arabia to
steal negroes, and went out of Tripolis unto that place which was two
hundred and forty leagues thence; but we were chained three and three
to an oar, and we rowed naked above the girdle, and the boatswain of
the galley walked abaft the mast, and his mate afore the mast, and each
of them a whip in their hands, and when their devilish choler rose they
would strike the Christians for no cause, and they allowed us but half
a pound of bread a man in a day, without any other kind of sustenance,
water excepted.  And when we came to the place where we saw the
carmosel, we were not suffered to have neither needle, bodkin, knife,
or any other instrument about us, nor at any other time in the night,
upon pain of one hundred bastinadoes:  we were then also cruelly
manacled, in such sort that we could not put our hands the length of
one foot asunder the one from the other, and every night they searched
our chains three times, to see if they were fast riveted.  We continued
the fight with the carmosel three hours, and then we took it, and lost
but two of our men in that fight; but there were slain of the Greeks
five, and fourteen were cruelly hurt; and they that were found were
presently made slaves, and chained to the oars, and within fifteen days
after we returned again into Tripolis, and then we were put to all
manner of slavery.  I was put to hew stones, and other to carry stones,
and some to draw the cart with earth, and some to make mortar, and some
to draw stones (for at that time the Turks builded a church), and thus
we were put to all kinds of slavery that was to be done.  And in the
time of our being there the Moors, that are the husbandmen of the
country, rebelled against the king, because he would have constrained
them to pay greater tribute than heretofore they had done, so that the
soldiers of Tripolis marched forth of the town, to have joined battle
against the Moors for their rebellion, and the king sent with them four
pieces of ordnance, which were drawn by the captives twenty miles into
the country after them, and at the sight thereof the Moors fled, and
then the captains returned back again.  Then I, and certain Christians
more, were sent twelve miles into the country with a cart to load
timber, and we returned again the same day.

Now, the king had eighteen captives, which three times a week went to
fetch wood thirty miles from the town, and on a time he appointed me
for one of the eighteen, and we departed at eight of the clock in the
night; and upon the way, as we rode upon the camels, I demanded of one
of our company who did direct us the way:  he said that there was a
Moor in our company which was our guide; and I demanded of them how
Tripolis and the wood bare one off the other, and he said,
"East-north-east and west-south-west."  And at midnight, or thereabouts,
as I was riding upon my camel, I fell asleep, and the guide and all the
rest rode away from me, not thinking but I had been among them.  When I
awoke, and, finding myself alone, I durst not call nor holloa, for fear
lest the wild Moors should hear me--because they hold this opinion,
that in killing a Christian they do God good service--and musing with
myself what were best for me to do:  if I should return back to
Tripolis without any wood or company I should be most miserably used;
therefore, of the two evils, rather I had to go forth to the losing of
my life than to turn back and trust to their mercy, fearing to be used
as before I had seen others.  For, understanding by some of my company
before how Tripolis and the said wood did lie one off another, by the
North Star I went forth at adventure, and, as God would have it, I came
right to the place where they were, even about an hour before day.
There altogether we rested, and gave our camels provender, and as soon
as the day appeared we rode all into the wood; and I, seeing no wood
there but a stick here and a stick there, about the bigness of a man's
arm, growing in the sand, it caused me to marvel how so many camels
should be loaded in that place.  The wood was juniper; we needed no axe
nor edged tool to cut it, but plucked it up by strength of hands, roots
and all, which a man might easily do, and so gathered together a little
at one place, and so at another, and laded our camels, and came home
about seven of the clock that night following:  because I fell lame and
my camel was tired, I left my wood in the way.

There was in Tripolis at that time a Venetian whose name was Benedetto
Venetiano, and seventeen captives more of his countrymen, which ran
away from Tripolis in a boat and came inside of an island called Malta,
which lieth forty leagues from Tripolis right north; and, being within
a mile of the shore and very fair weather, one of their company said,
"In dispetto de Dio adesso venio a pilliar terra," which is as much to
say:  "In the despite of God, I shall now fetch the shore;" and
presently there arose a mighty storm, with thunder and rain, and the
wind at the north, their boat being very small, so that they were
enforced to bear up room and to sheer right afore the wind over against
the coast of Barbary, from whence they came, and rowing up and down the
coast, their victuals being spent, the twenty-first day after their
departure, they were enforced through the want of food to come ashore,
thinking to have stolen some sheep.  But the Moors of the country very
craftily (perceiving their intent) gathered together a threescore of
horsemen and hid themselves behind the sandy hill, and when the
Christians were come all ashore, and passed by half a mile into the
country, the Moors rode betwixt them and their boat, and some of them
pursued the Christians, and so they were all taken and brought to
Tripolis, from whence they had before escaped; and presently the king
commanded that the foresaid Benedetto, with one more of his company,
should lose their ears, and the rest to be most cruelly beaten, which
was presently done.  This king had a son which was a ruler in an island
called Gerbi, whereunto arrived an English ship called the Green
Dragon, of the which was master one M. Blonket, who, having a very
unhappy boy on that ship, and understanding that whosoever would turn
Turk should be well entertained of the king's son, this boy did run
ashore and voluntarily turned Turk.  Shortly after the king's son came
to Tripolis to visit his father, and seeing our company, he greatly
fancied Richard Burges, our purser, and James Smith.  They were both
young men, therefore he was very desirous to have them to turn Turks;
but they would not yield to his desire, saying, "We are your father's
slaves and as slaves we will serve him."  Then his father the king sent
for them, and asked them if they would turn Turks; and they said:  "If
it please your Highness, Christians we were born and so we will remain,
and beseech the king that they might not be enforced thereunto."  The
king had there before in his house a son of a yeoman of our Queen's
guard, whom the king's son had enforced to turn Turk; his name was John
Nelson.  Him the king caused to be brought to these young men, and then
said unto them, "Will you not bear this, your countryman, company, and
be Turk as he is?" and they said that they would not yield thereunto
during life.  But it fell out that, within a month after, the king's
son went home to Gerbi again, being five score miles from Tripolis, and
carried our two foresaid young men with him, which were Richard Burges
and James Smith.  And after their departure from us they sent us a
letter, signifying that there was no violence showed unto them as yet;
yet within three days after they were violently used, for that the
king's son demanded of them again if that they would turn Turk.  Then
answered Richard Burges:  "A Christian I am, and so I will remain."
Then the king's son very angrily said unto him, "By Mahomet thou shalt
presently be made Turk!"  Then called he for his men and commanded them
to make him Turk; and they did so, and circumcised him, and would have
had him speak the words that thereunto belonged; but he answered them
stoutly that he would not, and although they had put on him the habit
of a Turk, yet said he, "A Christian I was born, and so I will remain,
though you force me to do otherwise."

And then he called for the other, and commanded him to be made Turk
perforce also; but he was very strong, for it was so much as eight of
the king's son's men could do to hold him.  So in the end they
circumcised him and made him Turk.  Now, to pass over a little, and so
to show the manner of our deliverance out of that miserable captivity.

In May aforesaid, shortly after our apprehension, I wrote a letter into
England unto my father, dwelling in Evistoke in Devonshire, signifying
unto him the whole estate of our calamities, and I wrote also to
Constantinople to the English ambassador, both which letters were
faithfully delivered.  But when my father had received my letter, and
understood the truth of our mishap, and the occasion thereof, and what
had happened to the offenders, he certified the Right Honourable the
Earl of Bedford thereof, who in short space acquainted her Highness
with the whole cause thereof; and her Majesty, like a most merciful
princess tendering her subjects, presently took order for our
deliverance.  Whereupon the Right Worshipful Sir Edward Osborne,
knight, directed his letters with all speed to the English ambassador
in Constantinople to procure our delivery, and he obtained the Great
Turk's commission, and sent it forthwith to Tripolis by one Master
Edward Barton, together with a justice of the Great Turk's and one
soldier, and another Turk and a Greek, which was his interpreter, which
could speak beside Greek, Turkish, Italian, Spanish and English.  And
when they came to Tripolis they were well entertained, and the first
night they did lie in a captain's house in the town.  All our company
that were in Tripolis came that night for joy to Master Barton and the
other commissioners to see them.  Then Master Barton said unto us,
"Welcome, my good countrymen," and lovingly entertained us; and at our
departure from him he gave us two shillings, and said, "Serve God, for
tomorrow I hope you shall be as free as ever you were."  We all gave
him thanks and so departed.  The next day, in the morning very early,
the king having intelligence of their coming, sent word to the keeper
that none of the Englishmen (meaning our company) should go to work.
Then he sent for Master Barton and the other commissioners, and
demanded of the said Master Barton his message.  The justice answered
that the Great Turk, his sovereign, had sent them unto him, signifying
that he was informed that a certain English ship, called the Jesus, was
by him the said king confiscated about twelve months since, and now my
said sovereign hath here sent his especial commission by us unto you
for the deliverance of the said ship and goods, and also the free
liberty and deliverance of the Englishmen of the said ship whom you
have taken and kept in captivity.  And further, the same justice said,
I am authorised by my said sovereign the Great Turk to see it done; and
therefore I command you, by the virtue of this commission, presently to
make restitution of the premises or the value thereof.  And so did the
justice deliver unto the king the Great Turk's commission to the effect
aforesaid, which commission the king with all obedience received; and
after the perusing of the same, he forthwith commanded all the English
captives to be brought before him, and then willed the keeper to strike
off all our irons.  Which done, the king said, "You Englishmen, for
that you did offend the laws of this place, by the same laws therefore
some of your company were condemned to die, as you know, and you to be
perpetual captives during your lives; notwithstanding, seeing it hath
pleased my sovereign lord the Great Turk to pardon your said offences,
and to give you your freedom and liberty, behold, here I make delivery
of you unto this English gentleman."  So he delivered us all that were
there, being thirteen in number, to Master Barton, who required also
those two young men which the king's son had taken with him.  Then the
king answered that it was against their law to deliver them, for that
they were turned Turks; and, touching the ship and goods, the king said
that he had sold her, but would make restitution of the value, and as
much of the goods as came unto his hands.  And so the king arose and
went to dinner, and commanded a Jew to go with Master Barton and the
other commissioners to show them their lodgings, which was a house
provided and appointed them by the said king.  And because I had the
Italian and Spanish tongues, by which there most traffic in that
country is, Master Barton made me his caterer, to buy his victuals for
him and his company, and he delivered me money needful for the same.
Thus were we set at liberty the 28th day of April, 1585.

Now, to return to the king's plagues and punishments which Almighty God
at his will and pleasure sendeth upon men in the sight of the world,
and likewise of the plagues that befell his children and others
aforesaid.  First, when we were made bondmen, being the second day of
May, 1584, the king had 300 captives, and before the month was expired
there died of them of the plague 150.  And whereas there were twenty-six
men of our company, of whom two were hanged and one died the same
day as we were made bondslaves, that present month there died nine more
of our company of the plague, and other two were forced to turn Turks
as before rehearsed; and on the 4th day of June next following, the
king lost 150 camels which were taken from him by the wild Moors; and
on the 28th day of the said month of June one Geffrey Malteese, a
renegado of Malta, ran away to his country, and stowed a brigantine
which the king had builded for to take the Christians withal, and
carried with him twelve Christians more which were the king's captives.
Afterwards about the 10th day of July next following, the king rode
forth upon the greatest and fairest mare that might be seen, as white
as any swan; he had not ridden forty paces from his house, but on a
sudden the same mare fell down under him stark dead, and I with six
more were commanded to bury her, skin, shoes, and all, which we did.
And about three months after our delivery, Master Barton, with all the
residue of his company, departed from Tripolis to Zante in a vessel
called a settea, of one Marcus Segoorus, who dwelt in Zante; and, after
our arrival at Zante, we remained fifteen days there aboard our vessel,
before we could have Platego (that is, leave to come ashore), because
the plague was in that place from whence we came, and about three days
after we came ashore, thither came another settea of Marseilles, bound
for Constantinople.  Then did Master Barton and his company, with two
more of our company, ship themselves as passengers in the same settea
and went to Constantinople.  But the other nine of us that remained in
Zante, about three months after, shipped ourselves in a ship of the
said Marcus Segoorus, which came to Zante, and was bound for England.
In which three months the soldiers of Tripolis killed the said king;
and then the king's son, according to the custom there, went to
Constantinople, to surrender up all his father's treasure, goods,
captives, and concubines unto the Great Turk, and took with him our
said purser Richard Burges, and James Smith, and also the other two
Englishmen which he the king's son had enforced to become Turks as is
aforesaid.  And they, the said Englishmen, finding now some
opportunity, concluded with the Christian captives which were going
with them unto Constantinople, being in number about 150, to kill the
king's son and all the Turks which were aboard of the galley, and
privily the said Englishmen conveyed unto the said Christian captives
weapons for that purpose.  And when they came into the main sea,
towards Constantinople (upon the faithful promise of the said Christian
captives) these four Englishmen leapt suddenly into the crossia--that
is, into the middest of the galley, where the cannon lieth--and with
their swords drawn, did fight against all the foresaid Turks, and for
want of help of the said Christian captives, who falsely brake their
promises, the said Master Blonket's boy was killed and the said James
Smith, and our purser Richard Burges, and the other Englishmen were
taken and bound into chains, to be hanged at their arrival in
Constantinople.  And, as the Lord's will was, about two days after,
passing through the Gulf of Venice, at an island called Cephalonia,
they met with two of the Duke of Venice, his galleys, which took that
galley, and killed the king's son and his mother, and all the Turks
that were there, in number 150, and they saved the Christian captives;
and would have killed the two Englishmen, because they were circumcised
and become Turks, had not the other Christian captives excused them,
saying that they were enforced to be Turks by the king's son, and
showed the Venetians how they did enterprise at sea to fight against
all the Turks, and that their two fellows were slain in that fight.
Then the Venetians saved them, and they, with all the residue of the
said captives, had their liberty, which were in number 150 or
thereabouts, and the said galley and all the Turks' treasure was
confiscated to the use of the State of Venice.  And from thence our two
Englishmen travelled homeward by land, and in this meantime we had one
more of our company which died in Zante, and afterwards the other eight
shipped themselves at Zante in a ship of the said Marcus Segoorus which
was bound for England.  And before we departed thence, there arrived
the Ascension and the George Bonaventure of London, in Cephalonia, in a
harbour there called Arrogostoria, whose merchants agreed with the
merchants of our ship, and so laded all the merchandise of our ship
into the said ships of London, who took us eight also in as passengers,
and so we came home.  And within two months after our arrival at London
our said purser Richard Burges, and his fellow, came home also, for the
which we are bound to praise Almighty God during our lives, and, as
duty bindeth us, to pray for the preservation of our most gracious
Queen, for the great care her Majesty had over us, her poor subjects,
in seeking and procuring of our deliverance aforesaid, and also for her
Honourable Privy Council; and I especially for the prosperity and good
estate of the house of the late deceased, the Right Honourable the Earl
of Bedford, whose honour I must confess most diligently, at the suit of
my father now departed, travailed herein--for the which I rest
continually bounden to him, whose soul I doubt not but already is in
the heavens in joy, with the Almighty, unto which place He vouchsafed
to bring us all, that for our sins suffered most vile and shameful
death upon the cross, there to live perpetually world without end.
Amen.


THE QUEEN'S LETTERS TO THE TURK, 1584, FOR THE RESTITUTION OF THE SHIP,
CALLED THE JESUS, AND THE ENGLISH CAPTIVES DETAINED IN TRIPOLIS, IN
BARBARY, AND FOR CERTAIN OTHER PRISONERS IN ALGIERS.

Elizabeth, by the grace of the Most High God and only Maker of Heaven
and Earth, of England, France, and Ireland Queen, and of the Christian
faith, against all the idolaters and false professors of the name of
Christ dwelling among the Christians, most invincible and puissant
Defender; to the most valiant and invincible Prince, Sultan Murad Can,
the most mighty ruler of the Kingdom of Mussulman and of the East
Empire, the only and highest monarch above all, health and many happy
and fortunate years, with great abundance of the best things.

Most noble and puissant Emperor, about two years now past, we wrote
unto your Imperial Majesty that our well-beloved servant, William
Harebrown, a man of great reputation and honour, might be received
under your high authority for our ambassador in Constantinople and
other places, under the obedience of your Empire of Mussulman; and also
that the Englishmen being our subjects might exercise intercourse and
merchandise in all those provinces no less freely than the French,
Polonians, Venetians, Germans, and other your confederates, which
travel through divers of the East parts endeavouring that by mutual
traffic the East may be joined and knit to the West.

Which privileges, when as your most puissant Majesty by your letters
and under your dispensation most liberally and favourably granted to
our subjects of England, we could no less do but in that respect give
you as great thanks as our heart could conceive, trusting that it will
come to pass that this order of traffic so well ordained will bring
with itself most great profits and commodities to both sides, as well
to the parties subject to your Empire as to the provinces of our
Kingdom.

Which thing, that it may be done in plain and effectual manner, whereas
some of our subjects of late at Tripolis in Barbary, and at Algiers,
were by the inhabitants of those places (being perhaps ignorant of your
pleasure) evil intreated and grievously vexed, we do friendly and
lovingly desire your Imperial Majesty that you will understand their
causes by our ambassador, and afterward give commandment to the
lieutenants and presidents of those provinces, that our people may
henceforth freely, without any violence or injury, travel and do their
business in those places.

And we again with all endeavour shall study to perform all those things
which we shall in any wise understand to be acceptable to your Imperial
Majesty, which God, the only Maker of the World, Most Best and Most
Great, long keep in health and flourishing.  Given in our Palace at
London, the 5th day of the month of September, in the year of Jesus
Christ our Saviour 1584, and of our reign the twenty-sixth.


THE COMMANDMENT OBTAINED OF THE GRAND SIGNIOR BY HER MAJESTY'S
AMBASSADOR, FOR THE QUIET PASSING OF HER SUBJECTS TO AND FROM HIS
DOMINIONS, SENT IN ANNO 1584 TO THE VICEROYS, ALGIERS, TUNIS, AND
TRIPOLIS IN BARBARY.

To our Beglerbeg of Algiers.  We certify thee by this our commandment
that the right honourable William Harebrowne, ambassador to the Queen's
Majesty of England, hath signified unto us that the ships of that
country, in their coming and returning to and from our Empire, on the
one part of the seas have the Spaniards, Florentines, Sicilians, and
Maltese, on the other part our countries, committed to your charge,
which above said Christians will not quietly suffer their egress and
regress into and out of our dominions, but to take and make the men
captives, and forfeit the ships and goods, as the last year the Maltese
did one which they took at Gerbi, and to that end do continually lie in
wait for them to their destruction, whereupon they are constrained to
stand to their defence at any such times as they might meet with them;
wherefore considering by this means they must stand upon their guard
when they shall see any galley afar off, whereby if meeting with any of
your galleys, and not knowing them, in their defence they do shoot at
them, and yet after, when they do certainly know them, do not shoot any
more, but require to pass peaceably on their voyage, which you would
deny, saying, "The peace is broken, for that you have shot at us, and
so do make prize of them, contrary to our privileges, and against
reason:"  for the preventing of which inconvenience the said ambassador
hath required this our commandment.  We therefore command thee that
upon sight hereof then do not permit any such matter in no sort
whatsoever, but suffer the said Englishmen to pass in peace, according
to the tenor of our commandment given, without any disturbance or let
by any means upon the way, although that, meeting with thy galleys, and
not knowing them afar off, they, taking them for enemies, should shoot
at them, yet shall ye not suffer them to hurt them therefor, but
quietly to pass.  Wherefore look thou, that they may have right
according to our privilege given them, and finding any that absenteth
himself and will not obey this our commandment, presently certify us to
our porch, that we may give order for his punishment; and with
reverence give faithful credit to this our commandment, which having
read, thou shalt again return it unto them that present it.  From our
palace in Constantinople, the prime of June, 1584.


THE TURK'S LETTER TO THE KING OF TRIPOLIS, IN BARBARY, COMMANDING THE
RESTITUTION OF AN ENGLISH SHIP, CALLED THE JESUS, WITH THE MEN AND
GOODS, SENT FROM CONSTANTINOPLE BY MAHOMET BEG, A JUSTICE OF THE GREAT
TURK'S, AND AN ENGLISH GENTLEMAN, CALLED MASTER EDWARD BARTON.  ANNO
1584.

Honourable and most worthy Pasha Romadan Beglerbeg, most wise and
prudent judge of the West Tripolis, we wish the end of all thy
enterprises happy and prosperous.  By these our Highness's letters we
certify thee that the Right Honourable William Harebrowne, Ambassador
in our most famous porch for the most excellent Queen's Majesty of
England, in person and by letters hath certified our Highness that a
certain ship, with all her furniture and artillery, worth two thousand
ducats, arriving in the port of Tripolis, and discharged of her lading
and merchandise, paid our custom according to order, and again the
merchants laded their ship with oil, which by constraint they were
enforced to buy of you, and having answered in like manner the custom
for the same, determined to depart.  A Frenchman, assistant to the
merchant, unknown to the Englishmen, carried away with him another
Frenchman indebted to a certain Moor in four hundred ducats, and by
force caused the Englishmen and ship to depart, who, neither suspecting
fraud nor deceit, hoisted sails.  In the meantime, this man, whose
debtor the Frenchman had stolen away, went to the Pasha with a
supplication, by whose means, and force of the Castle, the Englishmen
were constrained to return into the port, where the Frenchman, author
of the evil, with the master of the ship, an Englishman, innocent of
the crime, were hanged, and five-and-twenty Englishmen cast into
prison, of whom, through famine and thirst, and stink of the prison,
eleven died, and the rest were like to die.  Further, it was signified
to our Majesty also that the merchandise and other goods with the ship
were worth seven thousand six hundred ducats.  Which things, if they be
so, this is our commandment, which was granted and given by our
Majesty, that the English ship, and all the merchandise, and whatsoever
else was taken away, be wholly restored, and that the Englishmen be let
go free, and suffered to return into their country.  Wherefore, when
this our commandment shall come unto thee, we straightly command that
the foresaid business be diligently looked unto and discharged.  And if
it be so that a Frenchman, and no Englishman, hath done this craft and
wickedness, unknown to the Englishmen, and, as author of the
wickedness, is punished, and that the Englishmen committed nothing
against the peace and league, or their articles; also, if they paid
custom according to order, it is against law, custom of countries, and
their privilege, to hinder or hurt them.  Neither is it meet their
ship, merchandise, and all their goods taken should be withholden.  We
will, therefore, that the English ship, merchandise, and all other
their goods, without exception, be restored to the Englishmen; also,
that the men be let go free, and, if they will, let none hinder them to
return peaceably into their country; do not commit that they another
time complain of this matter, and how this business is despatched
certify us at our most famous porch.  Dated in the city of
Constantinople, in the nine hundred and ninety-second year of Mahomet,
and in the end of the month of October, and the year of Jesus 1584.


A LETTER OF MASTER WILLIAM HAREBROWNE, THE ENGLISH AMBASSADOR, LEDGER
IN CONSTANTINOPLE, TO THE PASHA ROMADAN, THE BEGLERBEG OF TRIPOLIS, IN
BARBARY, FOR THE RESTORING OF AN ENGLISH SHIP, CALLED THE JESUS, WITH
GOODS AND MEN DETAINED AS SLAVES, 1585.

Right Honourable Lord, it hath been signified unto us by divers
letters, what hath fallen out concerning a certain ship of ours, called
the Jesus, into which, for the help of Richard Skegs, one of our
merchants in the same, now deceased, there was admitted a certain
Frenchman, called Romaine Sonnings, which for his ill behaviour,
according to his deserts, seeking to carry away with him another
Frenchman, which was indebted to certain of your people, without paying
his creditors, was hanged by sentence of justice, together with Andrew
Dier, the master of the said ship, who, simply and without fraud,
giving credit to the said Frenchman, without any knowledge of this evil
fact, did not return when he was commanded by your honourable lordship.
The death of the said lewd Frenchman we approve as a thing well done,
but contrariwise, whereas your lordship hath confiscated the said ship,
with the goods therein, and hath made slaves of the mariners, as a
thing altogether contrary to the privileges of the Grand Signior,
granted four years since, and confirmed by us, on the behalf of the
most excellent the Queen's Majesty of England, our mistress, and
altogether contrary to the league of the said Grand Signior, who, being
fully informed of the aforesaid cause, hath granted unto us his royal
commandment of restitution, which we send unto your honourable lordship
by the present bearer, Edward Barton, our secretary, and Mahomet Beg,
one of the justices of his stately court, with other letters of the
most excellent Admiral and most valiant captain of the sea, requiring
your most honourable lordship, as well on the behalf of the Grand
Signior as of the Queen's most Excellent Majesty, my mistress, that the
men, oils, ship, furniture, money, and all other goods whatsoever, by
your lordship and your order taken from our men, be restored unto this
my secretary freely, without delay, as the Grand Signior of his
goodness hath granted unto us, especially in regard that the same oils
were bought by the commandment of our Queen's most Excellent Majesty
for the provision of her Court.  Which if you perform not, we protest
by these our letters against you, that you are the cause of all the
inconveniences which may ensue upon this occasion, as the author
thereof contrary to the holy league sworn by both our princes, as by
the privileges, which this our servant will show you, may appear.  For
the seeing of which league performed, we remain here as Ledger in this
stately court, and by this means you shall answer in another world unto
God alone, and in this world unto the Grand Signior, for this heinous
sin committed by you against so many poor souls, which by this your
cruelty are in part dead, and in part detained by you in most miserable
captivity.  Contrariwise, if it shall please you to avoid this
mischief, and to remain in the favour of Almighty God and of our
princes, you shall friendly fulfil this our just demand (as it behoveth
you to show yourself a prudent governor and faithful servant unto your
lord), and the same may turn to your great honour and profit by the
trade of merchandise, which our men in time to come may use in that
government of yours, which, generally, as well those poor men as all
others which you shall meet at the sea, ought to be, according to the
commandment of the Grand Signior, friendly entertained and received of
your honourable lordship; and we will not fail in the duties of a
special friend whatsoever you shall have occasion to use us as we
desire.  Almighty God grant unto your lordship (in the fulfilling of
this our just request, whereby we may be delivered from further trouble
in this matter and yourself from further displeasure) all true felicity
and increase of honour.  Given in our palace from Capamat, in Pera, the
15th of January, 1585.


A BRIEF EXTRACT SPECIFYING THE CERTAIN DAILY PAYMENTS, ANSWERED
QUARTERLY IN TIME OF PEACE, BY THE GRAND SIGNIOR, OUT OF HIS TREASURY,
TO THE OFFICERS OF HIS SERAGLIO OR COURT, SUCCESSIVELY IN DEGREES;
COLLECTED IN A YEARLY TOTAL SUM AS FOLLOWETH:

For his own diet every day, one thousand and one aspers, according to a
former custom received from his ancestors; notwithstanding that
otherwise his diurnal expense is very much, and not certainly known,
which sum maketh sterling money by the year, two thousand one hundred
and ninety-two pounds, three shillings, and eightpence.

The forty-five thousand janisaries, reparted into sundry places of his
dominions, at five aspers a day, amounteth by the year, five hundred
fourscore and eleven thousand and three hundred pounds.

The azamoglans' tribute children far surmount that number, for that
they are collected from among the Christians, from whom between the
years of five and twelve they are pulled away yearly perforce; whereof
I suppose those in service may be equal in number with the janisaries
abovesaid, at three aspers a day, one with another, which is two
hundred fourscore and fifteen thousand five hundred and fifty pounds.

The five Pashas whereof the Viceroy is supreme, at one thousand aspers
the day, besides their yearly revenues, amounteth sterling by the year,
ten thousand nine hundred and fifty pounds.

The five Beglerbegs, chief presidents of Greece, Hungary, and Slavonia,
being in Europe, in Anatolia, and Carmania of Asia, at one thousand
aspers the day; as also to eighteen other governors of provinces at
five hundred aspers the day, amounteth by the year thirty thousand five
hundred and threescore pounds.

The Pasha, admiral of the sea, one thousand aspers the day, two
thousand one hundred fourscore and ten thousand pounds.

The Aga of the janisaries, general of the footmen, five hundred aspers
the day, and maketh by the year in sterling money one thousand
fourscore and fifteen pounds.

The Imbrahur Pasha, master of his horse, one hundred and fifty aspers
the day, in sterling money three hundred and eight and twenty pounds.

The chief esquire under him, one hundred and fifty aspers, is three
hundred and eight and twenty pounds.

The Agas of the Spahi, captains of the horsemen, five at one hundred
and fifty aspers to either of them, maketh sterling one thousand nine
hundred threescore and eleven pounds.

The Capagi Pashas, head porters, four, one hundred and fifty aspers to
each, and maketh out in sterling money by the year, one thousand three
hundred and fourteen pounds.

The Sisinghir Pasha, controller of the household, one hundred and
twenty aspers the day, and maketh out in sterling money by the year,
two hundred threescore and two pounds, sixteen shillings.

The Chiaus Pasha, captain of the pensioners, one hundred and twenty
aspers the day, and amounteth to, by the year, in sterling money, two
hundred threescore and two pounds, sixteen shillings.

The Capigilar Caiafi, captain of his barge, one hundred and twenty
aspers the day, and maketh out by the year, in sterling money, two
hundred threescore and two pounds, sixteen shillings.

The Solach Bassi, captain of his guard, one hundred and twenty aspers,
two hundred threescore and two pounds, sixteen shillings.

The Giebrigi Bassi, master of the armoury, one hundred and twenty
aspers, two hundred threescore and two pounds, sixteen shillings.

The Topagi Bassi, master of the artillery, one hundred and twenty
aspers, two hundred threescore and two pounds, sixteen shillings.

The Echim Bassi, physician to his person, one hundred and twenty
aspers, two hundred threescore and two pounds, sixteen shillings.

The forty physicians under him, to each forty aspers is three thousand
eight hundred threescore and six pounds, sixteen shillings.

The Mustafaracas, spearmen attending on his person, in number 500, to
either threescore aspers, and maketh sterling threescore and five
thousand and seven hundred pounds.

The Cisingeri, gentlemen attending upon his diet, forty, at forty
aspers each of them, and amounteth to sterling by the year, three
thousand five hundred and four pounds.

The Chiausi, pensioners, four hundred and forty, at thirty aspers,
twenty-eight thousand nine hundred and eight pounds.

The Capagi, porters of the Court and city, four hundred at eight
aspers, and maketh sterling money by the year, seven thousand and eight
pounds.

The Solachi, archers of his guard, three hundred and twenty, at nine
aspers, and cometh unto, in English money, the sum of six thousand
three hundred and six pounds.

The Spahi, men of arms of the Court and the city, ten thousand, at
twenty-five aspers, and maketh of English money, five hundred forty and
seven thousand and five hundred pounds.

The Janisaries, sixteen thousand, at six aspers, is two hundred and ten
thousand and two hundred and forty pounds.

The Giebegi, furbishers of armour, one thousand five hundred, at six
aspers, and amounteth to sterling money, nineteen thousand seven
hundred and fourscore pounds.

The Seiefir, servitors in his esquire or stable, five hundred, at two
aspers, and maketh sterling money, two thousand one hundred fourscore
and ten pounds.

The Saefi, saddlers and bit-makers, five hundred, at seven aspers,
seven thousand six hundred threescore and five pounds.

The Capergi, carriers upon mules, two hundred, at five aspers, two
thousand one hundred fourscore and ten pounds.

The Ginegi, carriers upon camels, one thousand five hundred, at eight
aspers, and amounteth in sterling money to twenty-six thousand two
hundred and fourscore pounds.

The Reiz, or captains of the galleys, three hundred, at ten aspers, and
amounteth in English money, by the year, the sum of six thousand five
hundred threescore and ten pounds.

The Alechingi, masters of the said galleys, three hundred, at seven
aspers, four thousand five hundred fourscore and nineteen pounds.

The Getti, boatswains thereof, three hundred, at six aspers, is three
thousand nine hundred forty and two pounds.

The Oda Bassi, pursers, three hundred, at five aspers, maketh three
thousand two hundred and fourscore pounds.

The Azappi, soldiers, two thousand six hundred, at four aspers, whereof
the five hundred do continually keep the galleys, two-and-twenty
thousand seven hundred fourscore and six pounds.

The Mariers Bassi, masters over the shipwrights and caulkers of the
navy, nine, at twenty aspers the piece, amounteth to three thousand
fourscore and four pounds, four shillings.

The Master Dassi, shipwrights and caulkers, one thousand, at fourteen
aspers, and amounteth to, by the year, thirty thousand six hundred and
threescore pounds.

Summa totalis of daily payments amounteth by the year sterling one
million nine hundred threescore eight thousand seven hundred and
thirtyfive pounds, nineteen shillings, and eight pence, answered
quarterly without default with the sum of four hundred fourscore twelve
thousand one hundred fourscore and four pounds, four shillings, and
eleven pence, and is for every day five thousand three hundred
fourscore and thirteen pounds, fifteen shillings, and ten pence.


ANNUITIES OF LANDS NEVER IMPROVED FIVE TIMES MORE IN VALUE THAN THEIR
SUMS MENTIONED, GIVEN BY THE SAID GRAND SIGNIOR AS FOLLOWETH:

To the Viceroy for his timar or annuity, 60,000 gold ducats.

To the second pasha for his annuity, 50,000 ducats.

To the third pasha for his annuity, 40,000 ducats.

To the fourth pasha for his annuity, 30,000 ducats.

To the fifth pasha for his annuity, 20,000 ducats.

To the captain of the janisaries, 20,000 ducats.

To the Jou Merhor Bassi, master of his horse, 15,000 ducats.

To the captain of the pensioners, 10,000 ducats.

To the captain of his guard, 5,000 ducats.

Summa totalis, 90,000 livres sterling.

Besides these above specified be sundry other annuities, given to
divers others of his aforesaid officers, as also to certain persons
called Sahims, diminishing from three thousand to two hundred ducats,
esteemed treble to surmount the annuity abovesaid.


THE TURK'S CHIEF OFFICERS.

The Viceroy is high treasurer, notwithstanding that under him be three
sub-treasurers, called Testaders, which be accountable to him of the
receipts out of Europe, Asia, and Africa, save their yearly annuity of
lands.

The Lord Chancellor is called Nissangi Pasha, who sealeth with a
certain proper character such licenses, safe-conducts, passports,
especial grants, etc., as proceed from the Grand Signior;
notwithstanding all letters to foreign princes so firmed be after
enclosed in a bag and sealed by the Grand Signior, with a signet which
he ordinarily weareth about his neck, credited of them to have been of
ancient appertaining to King Solomon the Wise.

The Admiral giveth his voice in the election of all begies, captains of
islands (to whom he giveth their charge), as also appointeth the
sub-pashas, bailies or constables over cities and towns upon the
sea-coasts about Constantinople and in the Archipelago, whereof he
reapeth great profit.

The Sub-Bassi of Pera payeth him nearly fifteen thousand ducats, and so
likewise either of the others, according as they are placed.

The Resistop serveth in office to the Viceroy and Chancellor as
secretary, and so likewise doth the Cogy, Master of the Rolls, before
which two pass all writings presented to or granted by the said Viceroy
and Chancellor, offices of especial credit and like profit, moreover
rewarded with annuities of lands.

There be also two chief judges named Ladies Lisguire, the one over
Europe and the other over Asia and Africa, which in court do sit on the
bench at the left hand of the pashas.  These sell all offices to the
under-judges of the land called Cadies, whereof is one in every city or
town, before whom all matters of controversy are by judgment decided,
as also penalties and corrections for crimes ordained to be executed
upon the offenders by the Sub-bassi.


THE NUMBER OF SOLDIERS CONTINUALLY ATTENDING UPON THE BEGLERBEGS, THE
GOVERNORS OF PROVINCES, AND SANGIACKS, AND THEIR PETTY CAPTAINS
MAINTAINED OF THESE PROVINCES.

  The Beglerbegs of . . .               Persons.

  Graecia                               40,000
  Buda                                  15,000
  Slavonia                              15,000
  Anatolia                              15,000
  Caramania                             15,000
  Armenia                               18,000
  Persia                                20,000
  Usdrum                                15,000
  Chirusta                              15,000
  Caraemiti                             30,000
  Giersul                               32,000
  Bagdad                                25,000
  Balsara                               22,000
  Lassaija                              17,000
  Aleppo                                25,000
  Damascus                              17,000
  Cairo                                 12,000
  Abes                                  12,000
  Mecca                                  8,000
  Cyprus                                18,000
  Tunis, in Barbary                      8,000
  Tripolis, in Syria                     8,000
  Algiers                               40,000

Whose sangiacks and petty captains be three hundred and sixty-eight,
every of which retaining continually in pay from five hundred to two
hundred soldiers, may be, one with another, at least three hundred
thousand persons.


CHIEF OFFICERS IN HIS SERAGLIO ABOUT HIS PERSON BE THESE:

  Capiaga, high porter.
  Alnader Bassi, treasurer.
  Oda Bassi, chamberlain.
  Killergi Bassi, steward.
  Saraiaga, controller.
  Peskerolen, groom of the chamber.
  Edostoglan, gentleman of the ewer.
  Sehetaraga, armour-bearer.
  Choataraga, he that carrieth his riding cloak.
  Ebietaraga, groom of the stool.

There be many other meaner offices, which I esteem superfluous to
write.


THE TURK'S YEARLY REVENUE.

The Grand Signior's annual revenue is said to be fourteen millions and
a half of golden ducats, which is sterling five millions eightscore
thousand pounds.

The tribute paid by the Christians, his subjects, is one gold ducat
yearly for the redemption of every head, which may amount unto not so
little as one million of golden ducats, which is sterling three hundred
and threescore thousand pounds.

Moreover, in time of war he exacteth manifold sums, for maintenance of
his army and navy, of the said Christians.

The Emperor payeth him yearly tribute for Hungary threescore thousand
dollars, which is sterling thirteen thousand pounds, besides presents
to the Viceroy and pashas, which are said to surmount twenty thousand
dollars.


AMBASSADORS' ALLOWANCES.

The ambassador of the Emperor is allowed one thousand aspers the day.

The ambassador of the French king heretofore enjoyed the like; but of
late years, by means of displeasure conceived by Mahomet, then Viceroy,
it was reduced to six crowns the day, besides the provision of his
esquire of stable.

The ambassador of Poland and for the State of Venice are not Ledgers as
these two abovesaid.  The said Polack is allowed twelve French crowns
the day during his abode, which may be for a month.  Very seldom do the
State of Venice send any ambassador otherwise than enforced of urgent
necessity; but instead thereof keep there their agent, president over
their merchants, of them termed a bailiff, who hath no allowance of the
Grand Signior, although his port and state is in manner as magnifical
as the other aforesaid ambassadors'.  The Spanish ambassador was equal
with others in janisaries; but for so much as he would not, according
to custom, follow the list of other ambassadors in making presents to
the Grand Signior, he had no allowance.  His abode there was three
years, at the end whereof, having concluded a truce for six years,
taking place from his first coming in November last past, he was never
admitted to the presence of the Grand Signior.

                         -----


A TRUE REPORT OF A WORTHY FIGHT, PERFORMED IN THE VOYAGE FROM TURKEY BY
FIVE SHIPS OF LONDON, AGAINST ELEVEN GALLEYS AND TWO FRIGATES OF THE
KING OF SPAIN'S, AT PANTALAREA, WITHIN THE STRAITS, ANNO 1586.  WRITTEN
BY PHILIP JONES.

The merchants of London, being of the incorporation for the Turkey
trade, having received intelligences and advertisements from time to
time that the King of Spain, grudging at the prosperity of this
kingdom, had not only of late arrested all English ships, bodies, and
goods in Spain, but also, maligning the quiet traffic which they used,
to and in the dominions and provinces under the obedience of the Great
Turk, had given orders to the captains of his galleys in the Levant to
hinder the passage of all English ships, and to endeavour by their best
means to intercept, take, and spoil them, their persons and goods; they
hereupon thought it their best course to set out their fleet for Turkey
in such strength and ability for their defence that the purpose of
their Spanish enemy might the better be prevented, and the voyage
accomplished with greater security to the men and ships.  For which
cause, five tall and stout ships appertaining to London, and intending
only a merchant's voyage, were provided and furnished with all things
belonging to the seas, the names whereof were these:--

  1.  The Merchant Royal, a very brave and goodly ship, and of great
      report.
  2.  The Toby.
  3.  The Edward Bonaventure.
  4.  The William and John.
  5.  The Susan.

These five departing from the coast of England in the month of
November, 1585, kept together as one fleet till they came as high as
the isle of Sicily, within the Levant.  And there, according to the
order and direction of the voyage, each ship began to take leave of the
rest, and to separate himself, setting his course for the particular
port whereunto he was bound--one for Tripolis in Syria, another for
Constantinople, the chief city of the Turk's empire, situated upon the
coast of Roumelia, called of old Thracia, and the rest to those places
whereunto they were privately appointed.  But before they divided
themselves, they altogether consulted of and about a certain and
special place for their meeting again after the lading of their goods
at their several ports.  And in conclusion, the general agreement was
to meet at Zante, an island near to the main continent of the west part
of Morea, well known to all the pilots, and thought to be the fittest
place for their rendezvous; concerning which meeting it was also
covenanted on each side and promised that whatsoever ship of these five
should first arrive at Zante, should there stay and expect the coming
of the rest of the fleet for the space of twenty days.  This being
done, each man made his best haste, according as wind and weather would
serve him, to fulfil his course and to despatch his business; and no
need was there to admonish or encourage any man, seeing no time was
ill-spent nor opportunity omitted on any side in the performance of
each man's duty, according to his place.

It fell out that the Toby, which was bound for Constantinople, had made
such good speed, and gotten such good weather, that she first of all
the rest came back to the appointed place of Zante, and not forgetting
the former conclusion, did there cast anchor, attending the arrival of
the rest of the fleet, which accordingly (their business first
performed) failed not to keep promise.  The first next after the Toby
was the Royal Merchant, which, together with the William and John, came
from Tripolis in Syria, and arrived in Zante within the compass of the
aforesaid time limited.  These ships, in token of the joy on all parts
conceived for their happy meeting, spared not the discharging of their
ordnance, the sounding of drums and trumpets, the spreading of ensigns,
with other warlike and joyful behaviours, expressing by these outward
signs the inward gladness of their minds, being all as ready to join
together in mutual consent to resist the cruel enemy, as now in
sporting manner they made mirth and pastime among themselves.  These
three had not been long in the haven but the Edward Bonaventure,
together with the Susan her consort, were come from Venice with their
lading, the sight of whom increased the joy of the rest, and they, no
less glad of the presence of the others, saluted them in most friendly
and kind sort, according to the manner of the seas.  And whereas some
of these ships stood at that instant in some want of victuals, they
were all content to stay in the port till the necessities of each ship
were supplied, and nothing wanted to set out for their return.

In this port of Zante the news was fresh and current of two several
armies and fleets, provided by the King of Spain, and lying in wait to
intercept them:  the one consisting of thirty strong galleys, so well
appointed in all respects for the war that no necessary thing wanted,
and this fleet hovered about the Straits of Gibraltar.  The other army
had in it twenty galleys, whereof some were of Sicily and some of the
island of Malta, under the charge and government of John Andreas Dorea,
a captain of name serving the King of Spain.  These two divers and
strong fleets waited and attended in the seas for none but the English
ships, and no doubt made their account and sure reckoning that not a
ship should escape their fury.  And the opinion also of the inhabitants
of the isle of Zante was, that in respect of the number of galleys in
both these armies having received such strait commandment from the
king, our ships and men being but few and little in comparison of them,
it was a thing in human reason impossible that we should pass either
without spoiling, if we resisted, or without composition at the least,
and acknowledgment of duty to the Spanish king.

But it was neither the report of the attendance of these armies, nor
the opinions of the people, nor anything else, that could daunt or
dismay the courage of our men, who, grounding themselves upon the
goodness of their cause and the promise of God to be delivered from
such as without reason sought their destruction, carried resolute minds
notwithstanding all impediments to adventure through the seas, and to
finish their navigation maugre the beards of the Spanish soldiers.  But
lest they should seem too careless and too secure of their estate, and
by laying the whole and entire burden of their safety upon God's
Providence should foolishly presume altogether of His help, and neglect
the means which was put into their hands, they failed not to enter into
counsel among themselves and to deliberate advisedly for their best
defence.  And in the end, with general consent, the Merchant Royal was
appointed Admiral of the fleet, and the Toby Vice-Admiral, by whose
orders the rest promised to be directed, and each ship vowed not to
break from another whatsoever extremity should fall out, but to stand
to it to the death, for the honour of their country and the frustrating
of the hope of the ambitious and proud enemy.

Thus in good order they left Zante and the Castle of Grecia, and
committed themselves again to the seas, and proceeded in their course
and voyage in quietness, without sight of any enemy till they came near
to Pantalarea, an island so called betwixt Sicily and the coast of
Africa; into sight whereof they came the 13th day of July, 1586.  And
the same day, in the morning, about seven of the clock, they descried
thirteen sails in number, which were of the galleys lying in wait of
purpose for them in and about that place.  As soon as the English ships
had spied them, they by-and-bye, according to a common order, made
themselves ready for a fight, laid out their ordnance, scoured,
charged, and primed them, displayed their ensigns, and left nothing
undone to arm themselves thoroughly.  In the meantime, the galleys more
and more approached the ships, and in their banners there appeared the
arms of the isles of Sicily and Malta, being all as then in the service
and pay of the Spaniard.  Immediately both the Admirals of the galleys
sent from each of them a frigate to the Admiral of our English ships,
which being come near them, the Sicilian frigate first hailed them, and
demanded of them whence they were; they answered that they were of
England, the arms whereof appeared in their colours.  Whereupon the
said frigate expostulated with them, and asked why they delayed to send
or come with their captains and pursers to Don Pedro de Leiva, their
General, to acknowledge their duty and obedience to him, in the name of
the Spanish king, lord of those seas.  Our men replied and said that
they owed no such duty nor obedience to him, and therefore would
acknowledge none; but commanded the frigate to depart with that answer,
and not to stay longer upon her peril.  With that away she went; and up
came towards them the other frigate of Malta; and she in like sort
hailed the Admiral, and would needs know whence they were and where
they had been.  Our Englishmen in the Admiral, not disdaining an
answer, told them that they were of England, merchants of London, had
been in Turkey, and were now returning home; and to be requited in this
case, they also demanded of the frigate whence she and the rest of the
galleys were.  The messenger answered, "We are of Malta, and for mine
own part, my name is Cavalero.  These galleys are in service and pay to
the King of Spain, under the conduct of Don Pedro de Leiva, a nobleman
of Spain who hath been commanded hither by the king with this present
force and army of purpose to intercept you.  You shall therefore,"
quoth he, "do well to repair to him to know his pleasure; he is a
nobleman of good behaviour and courtesy, and means you no ill."  The
captain of the English Admiral, whose name was Master Edward Wilkinson,
now one of the six masters of Her Majesty's Royal Navy, replied and
said, "We purpose not at this time to make trial of Don Pedro his
courtesy, whereof we are suspicious and doubtful, and not without good
cause;" using withal good words to the messenger, and willing him to
come aboard him, promising security and good usage, that thereby he
might the better know the Spaniard's mind.  Whereupon he indeed left
his frigate and came aboard him, whom he entertained in friendly sort,
and caused a cup of wine to be drawn for him, which he took, and began,
with his cap in his hand and with reverent terms, to drink to the
health of the Queen of England, speaking very honourably of Her
Majesty, and giving good speeches of the courteous usage and
entertainment that he himself had received in London at the time that
the Duke of Alencon, brother to the late French king, was last in
England.  And after he had well drunk, he took his leave, speaking well
of the sufficiency and goodness of our ships, and especially of the
Merchant Royal, which he confessed to have seen before, riding in the
Thames near London.  He was no sooner come to Don Pedro de Leiva, the
Spanish General, but he was sent off again, and returned to the English
Admiral, saying that the pleasure of the General was this, that either
their captains, masters, and pursers should come to him with speed, or
else he would set upon them, and either take them or sink them.  The
reply was made by Master Wilkinson aforesaid that not a man should come
to him; and for the brag and threat of Don Pedro, it was not that
Spanish bravado that should make them yield a jot to their hindrance,
but they were as ready to make resistance as he to offer an injury.
Whereupon Cavalero the messenger left bragging, and began to persuade
them in quiet sort and with many words; but all his labour was to no
purpose, and as his threat did nothing terrify them, so his persuasion
did nothing move them to do that which he required.  At the last he
entreated to have the merchant of the Admiral carried by him as a
messenger to the General, that so he might be satisfied and assured of
their minds by one of their own company.  But Master Wilkinson would
agree to no such thing; although Richard Rowit, the merchant himself,
seemed willing to be employed in that message, and laboured by
reasonable persuasions to induce Master Wilkinson to grant it--as
hoping to be an occasion by his presence and discreet answers to
satisfy the General, and thereby to save the effusion of Christian
blood, if it should grow to a battle.  And he seemed so much the more
willing to be sent, by how much deeper the oaths and protestations of
this Cavalero were, that he would (as he was a true knight and a
soldier) deliver him back again in safety to his company.  Albeit,
Master Wilkinson, who, by his long experience, had received sufficient
trial of Spanish inconstancy and perjury, wished him in no case to put
his life and liberty in hazard upon a Spaniard's oath; but at last,
upon much entreaty, he yielded to let him go to the General, thinking
indeed that good speeches and answers of reason would have contented
him, whereas, otherwise, refusal to do so might peradventure have
provoked the more discontentment.

Master Rowit, therefore, passing to the Spanish General, the rest of
the galleys, having espied him, thought, indeed, that the English were
rather determined to yield than to fight, and therefore came flocking
about the frigate, every man crying out, "Que nuevas? que nuevas?  Have
these Englishmen yielded?"  The frigate answered, "Not so; they neither
have nor purpose to yield.  Only they have sent a man of their company
to speak with our General."  And being come to the galley wherein he
was, he showed himself to Master Rowit in his armour, his guard of
soldiers attending upon him, in armour also, and began to speak very
proudly in this sort:  "Thou Englishman, from whence is your fleet?
Why stand ye aloof off? know ye not your duty to the Catholic king,
whose person I here represent?  Where are your bills of lading, your
letters, passports, and the chief of your men?  Think ye my attendance
in these seas to be in vain, or my person to no purpose?  Let all these
things be done out of hand, as I command, upon pain of my further
displeasure, and the spoil of you all."  These words of the Spanish
General were not so outrageously pronounced, as they were mildly
answered by Master Rowit, who told him that they were all merchantmen,
using traffic in honest sort, and seeking to pass quietly, if they were
not urged further than reason.  As for the King of Spain, he thought
(for his part) that there was amity betwixt him and his Sovereign, the
Queen of England, so that neither he nor his officers should go about
to offer any such injury to English merchants, who, as they were far
from giving offence to any man, so they would be loth to take an abuse
at the hands of any, or sit down to their loss, where their ability was
able to make defence.  And as touching his commandment aforesaid for
the acknowledging of duty in such particular sort, he told him that,
where there was no duty owing there none should be performed, assuring
him that their whole company and ships in general stood resolutely upon
the negative, and would not yield to any such unreasonable demand,
joined with such imperious and absolute manner of commanding.  "Why,
then," said he, "if they will neither come to yield, nor show obedience
to me in the name of my king, I will either sink them or bring them to
harbour; and so tell them from me."  With that the frigate came away
with Master Rowit, and brought him aboard to the English Admiral again,
according to promise, who was no sooner entered in but by-and-bye
defiance was sounded on both sides.  The Spaniards hewed off the noses
of the galleys, that nothing might hinder the level of the shot; and
the English, on the other side, courageously prepared themselves to the
combat, every man, according to his room, bent to perform his office
with alacrity and diligence.  In the meantime a cannon was discharged
from out the Admiral of the galleys, which, being the onset of the
fight, was presently answered by the English Admiral with a culverin;
so the skirmish began, and grew hot and terrible.  There was no powder
nor shot spared, each English ship matched itself in good order against
two Spanish galleys, besides the inequality of the frigates on the
Spanish side.  And although our men performed their parts with singular
valour, according to their strength, insomuch that the enemy, as amazed
therewith, would oftentimes pause and stay, and consult what was best
to be done, yet they ceased not in the midst of their business to make
prayer to Almighty God, the revenger of all evils and the giver of
victories, that it would please Him to assist them in this good quarrel
of theirs, in defending themselves against so proud a tyrant, to teach
their hands to war and their fingers to fight, that the glory of the
victory might redound to His name, and to the honour of true religion,
which the insolent enemy sought so much to overthrow.  Contrarily, the
foolish Spaniards, they cried out, according to their manner, not to
God, but to our Lady (as they term the Virgin Mary) saying, "Oh, Lady,
help!  Oh, blessed Lady, give us the victory, and the honour thereof
shall be thine."  Thus with blows and prayers on both sides, the fight
continued furious and sharp, and doubtful a long time to which part the
victory would incline, till at last the Admiral of the galleys of
Sicily began to warp from the fight, and to hold up her side for fear
of sinking, and after her went also two others in like case, whom all
the sort of them enclosed, labouring by all their means to keep them
above water, being ready by the force of English shot which they had
received to perish in the seas.  And what slaughter was done among the
Spaniards the English were uncertain, but by a probable conjecture
apparent afar off they supposed their loss was so great that they
wanted men to continue the charging of their pieces; whereupon with
shame and dishonour, after five hours spent in the battle, they
withdrew themselves.  And the English, contented in respect of their
deep lading rather to continue their voyage than to follow in the
chase, ceased from further blows, with the loss of only two men slain
amongst them all, and another hurt in his arm, whom Master Wilkinson,
with his good words and friendly promises, did so comfort that he
nothing esteemed the smart of his wound, in respect of the honour of
the victory and the shameful repulse of the enemy.

Thus, with dutiful thanks to the mercy of God for His gracious
assistance in that danger, the English ships proceeded in their
navigation.  And coming as high as Algiers, a port town upon the coast
of Barbary, they made for it, of purpose to refresh themselves after
their weariness, and to take in such supply of fresh water and victuals
as they needed.  They were no sooner entered into the port but
immediately the king thereof sent a messenger to the ships to know what
they were.  With which messenger the chief master of every ship
repaired to the king, and acquainted him not only with the state of
their ships in respect of merchandise, but with the late fight which
they had passed with the Spanish galleys, reporting every particular
circumstance in word as it fell out in action; whereof the said king
showed himself marvellous glad, entertaining them in the best sort, and
promising abundant relief of all their wants; making general
proclamation in the city, upon pain of death, that no man, of what
degree or state soever he were, should presume either to hinder them in
their affairs or to offer them any manner of injury in body or goods;
by virtue whereof they despatched all things in excellent good sort
with all favour and peaceableness.  Only such prisoners and captives of
the Spaniards as were in the city, seeing the good usage which they
received, and hearing also what service they had performed against the
foresaid galleys, grudged exceedingly against them, and sought as much
as they could to practise some mischief against them.  And one amongst
the rest, seeing an Englishman alone in a certain lane of the city,
came upon him suddenly, and with his knife thrust him in the side, yet
made no such great wound but that it was easily recovered.  The English
company, hearing of it, acquainted the king of the fact; who
immediately sent both for the party that had received the wound and the
offender also, and caused an executioner, in the presence of himself
and the English, to chastise the slave even to death, which was
performed, to the end that no man should presume to commit the like
part or to do anything in contempt of his royal commandment.

The English, having received this good justice at the king's hands, and
all other things that they wanted or could crave for the furnishing of
their ships, took their leave of him, and of the rest of their friends
that were resident in Algiers, and put out to sea, looking to meet with
the second army of the Spanish king, which waited for them about the
mouth of the Strait of Gibraltar, which they were of necessity to pass.
But coming near to the said strait, it pleased God to raise, at that
instant, a very dark and misty fog, so that one ship could not discern
another if it were forty paces off, by means whereof, together with the
notable fair Eastern winds that then blew most fit for their course,
they passed with great speed through the strait, and might have passed,
with that good gale, had there been five hundred galleys to withstand
them and the air never so clear for every ship to be seen.  But yet the
Spanish galleys had a sight of them, when they were come within three
English miles of the town, and made after them with all possible haste;
and although they saw that they were far out of their reach, yet in a
vain fury and foolish pride, they shot off their ordnance and made a
stir in the sea as if they had been in the midst of them, which vanity
of theirs ministered to our men notable matter of pleasure and mirth,
seeing men to fight with shadows and to take so great pains to so small
purpose.

But thus it pleased God to deride and delude all the forces of that
proud Spanish king, which he had provided of purpose to distress the
English; who, notwithstanding, passed through both his armies--in the
one, little hurt, and in the other, nothing touched, to the glory of
His immortal name, the honour of our prince and country, and the just
commendation of each man's service performed in that voyage.

                        -----
