
He praised, he praied, hee desired and besought her to pittie him that
perisht for her. From this his intranced mistaking extasie could no man
remoue him. Who loueth resolutely, will include euerie thing vnder the
name of his loue. From prose he would leape into verse, and with these
or such lyke rimes assault her.


     _If I must die, O let me choose my death,
     Sucke out my soule with kisses cruell maide,
     In thy breasts christall bals enbalme my breath,
     Dole it all out in sighs when I am laid.

     Thy lips on mine like cupping glasses claspe,
     Let our tongs meete and siriue as they would sting,
     Crush out my winde with one strait girting graspe,
     Stabs on my heart keepe time whitest thou dost sing.

     Thy eies like searingyrons burne out mine,
     In thy faire tresses stifle me outright,
     Like Circes change me to a loathsome swine,
     So I may liue for euer in thy sight
     Into heauens ioyes can none prof oundly see,
     Except that first they meditate on thee._

Sadly and verily, if my master said true, I should if I were a wench
make many men quickly immortall. What ist, what ist for a maide fayre
and freshe to spend a little lip salue on a hungrie louer. My master
beate the bush and kept a coile and a pratling, but I caught the birde,
simplicitie and plainnesse shall carrie it awaie in another world. God
wot he was _Petro Desperato_, when I stepping to hir with a dunstable
tale made vp my market A holy requiem to their soules that thinke to
wooe women with riddles. I had some cunning plot you must suppose, to
bring this about Her husband had abused her, and it was verie necessarie
she shoulde be reuenged. Seldome doe they proue patient martyrs who are
punisht vniustly. One way or other they wil cry quittance whatsoeuer it
cost them. No other apte meanes had this poore shee captiued _Cicely_,
to worke her hoddy peake husbande a proportionable plague to his
ielousie, but to giue his head his ful loding of infamie. She thought
she would make him complaine for some thing, that now was so hard bound
with an hereticall opinion. Howe I dealt with her, gesse gentle reader,
_Sub audi_ that I was in prison, and she was my Jailor.

Meanes there was made after a moneths or two durance by M. _Iohn
Russell_, a gentleman of king Henrie the eights chamber, who then lay
lieger at _Venice_ for England, that our cause should be fauorably
heard. At that time was Monsieur _Petro Aretino_ searcher and chiefe
Inquisiter for the colledge of curtizans. Diuerse and sundrie wayes was
this _Aretine_ beholding to the king of England, especially for by this
foresaid M. _Russell_ a little before he had sent him a pension of foure
hundreth crownes yerely during his life. Very forcibly was hee dealt
withall, to straine the vtmost of his credit for our deliuerie. Nothing
at his handes wee sought, but that the curtizan might be more narrowly
sifted and examined. Such and so extraordinarie was his care and
industrie heerein, that within few dayes after mistres _Tabitha_ and
her pandor cride _Peccaui confiteor_, and we were presently discharched,
they for example sake executed. Most honorably after our enlargement
of the state were we vsed, and had sufficient recompence for all our
troubles and wrongs.

Before I goe anie further, let me speake a word or two of this
_Aretine_. It was one of the wittiest knaues that euer God made. If out
of so base a thing as inke there may be extracted a spirite, he writ
with nought but the spirite of inke, and his stile was the spiritualtie
of artes, and nothing else, where as all others of his age were but
the lay temporaltie of inkhorne tearmes. For in deede they were meere
temporizers, & no better. His penne was sharpe pointed like ponyard. No
leafe he wrote on, but was like a burning glasse to sette on fire all
his readers. With more then musket shot did he charge his quill, where
he meant to inueigh. No one houre but he sent a whole legion of deuils
into some heard of swine or other. If _Martiall_ had ten muses (as he
sayth of himselfe) when hee but tasted a cup of wine, he had ten score
when he determined to tyranize. Nere a line of his but was able to make
a man dronken with admiration. His sight pearst like lightning into
the intrailes of al abuses. This I must needs saie, that most of his
learning hee gotte by hearing the lectures at Florence. It is sufficient
that learning he had, and a conceite exceeding all learning, to
quintescence euerie thing which he hard. He was no timerous seruile
flatterer of the commonwealth wherein he liued. His tongue and his
inuention were foreborne, what they thought they would confidently
vtter. Princes hee sparde not, that in the least point transgrest. His
life he contemned in comparison of the libertie of speech. Whereas some
dull braine maligners of his, accuse him of that treatise _de tribus
impostoribus Mundi_, which was neuer contriued without a generall
counsell of deuils, I am verily perswaded it was none of his, and of my
minde are a number of the most iudiciall Italians. One reason is this,
because it was published fortie yeeres after his death, and he neuer in
all his life wrote anie thing in Latine. Certainly I haue heard that one
of _Machiuuels_ followers and disciples was the author of that booke,
who to auoid discredite, filcht it forth vnder _Aretines_ name, a great
while after hee had sealed vp his eloquent spirit in the graue. Too much
gall dyd that wormwood of Gibeline wits put in his inke, who ingraued
that rubarbe Epitaph on this excellent Poets tombstone, Quite forsaken
of all good Angels was he, and vtterly giuen ouer to an artlesse
enuie. Foure vniuersities honored _Aretine_ with these rich titles, _Il
flagello de principe Il veritiero, Il deuino, & Lvnico Aretino_. The
French king Frances the first, he kept in such awe, that to chaine his
tongue, he sent him a huge chaine of golde, in the forme of tongues
fashioned. Singularly hath hee commented of the humanity of Christ
Besides, as Moses set forth his Genesis, so hath hee set forth his
Genesis also, including the contents of the whole Bible. A notable
treatise hath hee compiled, called _Il sette Psalmi ponetentiarii_.
All the _Thomasos_ haue cause to loue him, because he hath dilated so
magnificently of the life of Saint Thomas. There is a good thing that he
hath set forth _La vita della virgine Maria_, though it somewhat smell
of superstition, with a number more, which here for tediousnesse I
suppresse. If lasciuious he were, he may answere with _Ouid, Vita
verecunda est, musa iocosa mea est_, My lyfe is chast though wanton be
my verse. Tell mee who is most trauelled in histories, what good Poet
is or euer was there, who hath not had a little spice of wantonnes in
dayes? Euen _Beza_ himselfe by your leaue. _Aretine_ as long as the
worlde liues shalt thou liue. _Tully, Virgil, Ouid, Seneca_, were neuer
such ornaments to Italy as thou hast beene. I neuer thought of Italy
more religiously than England til I heard of thee. Peace to thy Ghost,
and yet mee thinkes so indefinite a spirite should haue no peace or
intermission of paines, but be penning Ditties to the Archangels in
another world. Puritans spue forth the venome of your dull inuentions.
A Toade swelles with thicke troubled poison, you swell with poisonous
perturbations, your mallice hath not a cleare dram of anie inspired
disposition.

My principall subiect pluckes me by the elbowe, _Diamante Castaldos_ the
magnificos wife, after my enlargment proued to bee with childe, at which
instant there grewe an vnsatiable famine in Venice, wherein, whether it
were for meere niggardise, or that _Castaldo_ still eate out his heart
with iealousie, Saint Anne be our recorde, he turnde vp the heeles verie
deuoutly. To master _Aretine_ after this, once more verie dutifully I
appeald, requested him of fauour, acknowledged former gratuities,
hee made no more humming or haulting, but in despite of her husbandes
kinsfolkes, gaue her her _Nunc dimittis_, and so establisht her free of
my companie.

Beeing out, and fully possest of her husbandes goods, she inuested mee
in the state of a Monarch. Because the time of childbirth drew nigh,
and shee coulde not remaine in Venice but discredited, she decreed to
trauell whether so euer I woulde conduct her. To see Italy throughout
was my proposed scope, and that waie if shee woulde trauell, haue with
her, I had wherewithall to relieue her.

From my master by her fulhand prouokement I parted without leaue, the
state of an Earle hee had thrust vppon me before, and nowe I woulde not
bate him an inch of it. Through all the Cities past I by no other
name but the yong Earle of Surrey, my pompe, my appareil, traine, and
expence, was nothing inferiour to his, my lookes were as loftie, my
wordes as magnificall. Memorandum, that Florence beeing the principall
scope of my masters course, missing mee, he iourneied thether without
interruption. By the waie as he went, he heard of another Earle of
Surrey besides himselfe, which caused him make more hast to fetch me in,
whom he little dreamed of, had such art in my budget, to separate the
shadowe from the bodie.

Ouertake me at Florence he did, where sitting in my pontificalibus with
my curtizan at supper, lyke _Anthonie and Cleopatra_, when they quafte
standing bowles of wine spiced with pearle together, he stole in ere
we sent for him, and bad much good it vs, and askt vs whether we wanted
anie guests. If he had askt me whether I would haue hanged my selfe,
his question had beene more acceptable. He that had then vngartered mee,
might haue pluckt out my heart at my hams.

My soule which was made to soare vpward, now sought for passage
downward, my blood as the blushing _Sabine_ maids surprized on the
sodain by the souldiers of _Romulus_, ran to the noblest of bloud
amongest them for succour, that were in no lesse (if not greater
daunger) so dyd it runne for refuge to the noblest of his bloude about
my heart assembled that stood in more need it selfe of comfort and
refuge. A trembling earthquake or shaking feauer assailed either of vs,
and I thinke vnfainedly, if he seeing our faint heart agonie, had not
soone cheered and refreshed vs, the dogs had gone together by the eares
vnder the table for our feare-dropped lims.

In stead of menacing or afrighting me with his swoord, or his frounes
for my superlatiue presumption, hee burst out into a laughter aboue Ela,
to thinke how brauely napping hee had tooke vs, and how notablie wee
were dampt & stroke dead in the neast, with the vnexpected view of his
presence.

Ah quoth he, my noble Lord, (after his tongue had borrowed a little
leaue of his laughter) is it my lucke to visite you thus vnlookt for, I
am sure you wil bid me welcome, if it be but for the names sake. It is
a wonder to see two English Earles of one house, at one time together
in Italy. I hearing him so pleasant, began to gather vp my spirits, and
replide as boldly as I durst Sir, you are welcome, your name which I
haue borrowed I haue not abused. Some large summes of money this my
sweete mistres _Diamante_ hath made me master of, which I knew not
how better to imploy for the honour of my country, than by spending it
munificently vnder your name. No Englishman would I haue renowmed for
bounty, magnificence and curtesie but you, vnder your colours all my
meritorious workes I was desirous to shroud. Deeme it no insolence to
adde increase to your fame. Had I basely and beggerly, wanting abilitie
to support anie parte of your roialtie, vndertooke the estimation of
this high calling, your alledgement of iniury had ben the greater, and
my defence lesse authorized. It will be thought but a policie of yours
thus to send one before you, who being a follower of yours, shall keepe
and vphold the estate and port of an Earle. I haue knowen many Earles my
selfe that in their owne persons would go verie plaine, but delighted to
haue one that belonged to them (being loden with iewels, apparelled in
cloth of golde and all the rich imbroderie that might bee) to stand bare
headed vnto him, arguing thus much, that if y greatest men went not more
sumptuous, how more great than the greatest was he that could command
one going so sumptuous. A noble mans glorie appeareth in nothing so much
as in the pompe of his attendants. What is the glorie of the Sunne, but
that the moone and so many millions of starres borrow their light from
him? If you can reprehend me of anie one illiberall licentious action I
haue disparaged your name with, heape shame on me prodigally, I beg no
pardon or pittie. _Non veniunt in idem pudor & amor_, hee was loth to
detract from one that he loued so. Beholding with his eies that I dipt
not the wings of his honor, but rather increast them with additions of
expence, he intreated me as if I had bin an Embassadour, he gaue me his
hand and swore he had no more hearts but one, and I should haue halfe of
it, in that I so inhanced his obscured reputation. One thing, quoth he,
my sweete Jacke I will intreate thee (it shalbe but one) that though
I am wel pleased thou shouldest be the ape of my birthright, (as what
noble man hath not his ape & his foole) yet that thou be an ape without
a clog, not carrie thy curtizan with thee. I tolde him that a king could
do nothing without his treasury, this curtizan was my purs-bearer, my
countenance and supporter. My earldome I would sooner resigne than part
with such a speciall benefactresse. Resigne it I will how euer, since I
am thus challenged of stolne goods by the true owner: Lo, into my former
state I returne againe, poore _Iack Wilton_ and your seruant am I, as I
was at the beginning, and so will I perseuer to my liues ending.

That theame was quickly cut off, and other talke entered in place, of
what I haue forgot, but talke it was, and talke let it be, and talke
it shall be, for I do not meane here to remember it. We supt, we got to
bed, we rose in the morning, on my master I waited, and the first
thing he did after he was vp, he went and visited the house where his
_Geraldine_ was borne, at sight wherof he was so impassioned, that in
the open street but for me, he would haue made an oration in praise
of it. Into it we were conducted, and shewed each seueral roome therto
appertaining. O but when he came to the chamber where his _Geraldines_
cleere Sunbeams first thrust themselues into this cloude of flesh, and
acquainted mortalitie with the puritie of Angels, then did his mouth
ouerflowe with magnificats, his tongue thrust the starres out of heauen,
and eclipsed the Sun and Moone with comparisons, _Geraldine_ was the
soule of heauen, sole daughter and heire to _primus motor_. The alcumy of
his eloquence, out of the incomprehensible drossie matter of clouds
and aire, distilled no more quintescence than woulde make his Geraldine
compleat faire.

In praise of the chamber that was so illuminatiuely honoured with her
radiant conception, he penned this sonet:

     _Faire rootne the presence of sweet beauties pride,
     The place the Sunne vpon the earth did hold,
     When Phaton his chariot did misguide,
     The towre where loue raind downe himselfe in gold.

     Prostrate as holy groutid He worship thee,
     Our Ladies chappell henceforth be thou nanid.
     Heere first loues Queene put on mortalitie,
     And with her beautie all the world inflamed.
     Heatfns chambers harboring firie cherubines,
     Are not with thee in glorie to compare,
     Lightning it is not light which in thee shines,
     None enter thee but straight entranced are.

     O if Elizium be aboue the ground,
     Then here it is where nought but ioy is found._

Many other Poems and Epigrams in that chambers patient alablaster
inclosure (which her melting eies long sithence had softned) were
curiously ingraued. Diamondes thought themselues _Dii mundi_, if they
might but carue hir name on the naked glasse. With them on it did he
anatomize these bodie-wanting mots, _Dulce puella malum est. Quod fugit
ipse sequor. Amor est teni causa sequendi. O infolix ego. Cur vidi,
curperii. Non patienter amo. Tantum patiatur amari_. After the viewe of
these veneriall monumentes, he published a proude challenge in the Duke
of Florence court agaynst all commers, (whether Christians, Turkes,
Canibals, Jewes, or Saracens), in defence of his Geraldines beautie.
More mildly was it accepted, in that she whom he defended, was a towne
borne child of that Citie, or else the pride of the Italian would
haue preuented him ere he should haue come to performe it. The Duke of
Florence neuerthelesse sent for him, and demanded him of his estate, and
the reason that drew him thereto, which when hee was aduertised of
to the full, he granted all Countries whatsoeuer, as wel enemies and
outlawes, as friendes and confederates, free accesse and regresse into
his dominions vnmolested, vntill that insolent triall were ended.

The right honourable and euer renowmed Lorde _Henrie Howard_ Earle of
Surrey my singular good Lorde and master, entered the listes after this
order. His armour was all intermixed with lyllies and roses, and
the bases therof bordered with nettles and weeds, signifieng stings,
crosses, and ouergrowing incumbrances in his loue, his helmet round
proportioned like a gardeners waterpot, from which seemed to issue forth
small thrids of water, like citerne stringes, that not onely did moisten
the lillies and roses, but did fructifie as well the nettles and weedes,
and made them ouergrow their liege Lordes. Whereby hee did importe thus
much, that the teares that issued from his braine, as those arteficiall
distillations issued from the well counterfeit waterpot on his head,
watered and gaue life as well to his mistres disdaine (resembled to
nettles and weedes) as increase of glorie to her care-causing beautie,
(comprehended vnder the lillies and roses.) The simbole thereto annexed
was this, _ex lachrimis lachrimæ_. The trappinges of his horse were
pounced and boulstered out with rough plumed siluer plush, in full
proportion and shape of an Estrich. On the breast of the horse were the
forepartes of this greedie birde aduaunced, whence as his manner is, hee
reacht out his long necke to the raines of the bridle, thinking they had
beene yron, and styll seemed to gape after the golden bit, and euer
as the courser dyd rayse or curuet, to haue swallowed it halfe in. His
winges, which hee neuer vseth but running, beeing spreaded full sayle,
made his lustie steede as proude vnder him as he had beene some other
_Pegasus_, and so quieueringly and tenderly were these his broade wings
bound to either side of him, that as he paced vp and downe the tilt-yard
in his maiestie ere the knights were entered, they seemed wantonly to
fan in his face and make a flickering sound, such as Eagles doe, swiftly
pursuing their praie in the ayre. On either of his winges, as the
Estrich hath a sharpe goade or pricke wherewith hee spurreth himselfe
forwarde in his saile-assisted race, so this artificiall Estrich, on the
imbent knuckle of the pinion of either wing, had embossed christall eies
affixed, wherein wheele wise were circularly ingrafted sharpe pointed
diamonds, as rayes from those eies deriued, that like the rowels of a
spurre ran deep into his horse sides, and made him more eager in his
course.

Such a fine dimme shine dide these christall eies and these round
enranked diamonds make through their bolne swelling bowres of feathers,
as if it had beene a candle in a paper lanterne, or a gloworme in a bush
by night, glistering through the leaues and briers. The taile of the
Estrich being short and thicke, serued verie fitly as a plume to tricke
vp his horse taile with, so that euerie parte of him was as naturally
coapted as might be. The word to this deuice was _Aculeo alatus_, I
spread my wings onely spurd with her eies. The morral of the whole is
this, that as the Estrich, the most burning sighted bird of all others,
insomuch as the female of them hatcheth not hir egs by couering them,
but by the effectual raies of hir eies as he, I saie, outstrippeth the
nimblest trippers of his feathered condition in footman-shippe, onely
spurd on with the needle quickning goade vnder his side, so hee no lesse
burning sighted than the Estrich, spurd on to the race of honor by the
sweete raies of his mistres eies, perswaded himselfe hee should outstrip
all other in running to the goale of glorie only animated and incited
by her excellence. And as the Estrich wil eat iron, swallow anie hard
mettall whatsoeuer, so would he refuse no iron aduenture, no hard taske
whatsoeuer, to sit in the grace of so fayre a commander. The order of
his shield was this, it was framed like a burning glasse, beset round
with flame colourd feathers, on the outside whereof was his mistres
picture adorned as beautifull as art could portrature, on the inside a
naked sword tied in a true loue knot, the mot, _Militat omtiis amans_.
Signifieng that in a true loue knot his sword was tide to defend and
maintaine the high features of his mistres.

Next him entered the blacke knight, whose beauer was pointed all torne
& bloudie, as though he had new come from combatting with a Beare, his
head piece seemed to bee a little ouen fraught full with smoothering
flames, for nothing but sulphure and smoake voided out at the cleftes
of his beauer. His bases were all imbrodered with snakes & adders,
ingendered of the abundance of innocent bloud that was shed. His horses
trappinges were throughout bespangled with hunnie spottes, which are no
blemishes, but ornaments. On his shield he bare the Sunne full shining
on a diall at his going downe, the word _sufficit tandem_.

After him followed the knight of the Owle, whose armor was a stubd tree
ouergrowen with iuie, his helmet fashioned lyke an owle sitting on the
top of this iuie, on his bases were wrought all kinde of birdes as on
the grounde wondering about him, the word, _Ideo mirum quia monstrunty_
his horses furniture was framed like a cart, scattering whole sheaues
of corne amongst hogs, the word _Liberalitas liberalitate perit_. On his
shield a bee intangled in sheepes wooll, the mot _Frontis nulla fides_.
The fourth that succeeded was a well proportioned knight in an armor
imitating rust, whose head piece was prefigured like flowers growing in
a narrowe pot, where they had not anie space to spread their roots or
dispearse their florishing. His bases embelisht with open armed handes
scattering golde amongst tranchions, the word _Cura futuri est_. His
horse was harnished with leaden chaines, hauing the outside guilt, or at
least saffrond in stead of guilt, to decypher a holie or golden pretence
of a couetous purpose, the sentence _Cani capilli mei compedes_, on his
target he had a number of crawling wormes kept vnder by a blocke, the
faburthen, _Speramus lucent_. The fift was the forsaken knight, whose
helmet was crowned with nothing but cipresse and willow garlands, ouer
his armor he had on _Himens_ nuptiall robe died in a duskie yelow, and
all to be defaced and discoloured with spots & staines. The enigma,
_Nosquoque floritnus_, as who shuld saie, we haue bin in fashion, his
stead was adorned with orenge tawnie eies, such as those haue that haue
the yellowe iandies, that make all things yellow they looke vpon, with
this briefe, _Qui inuident egent_. Those that enuie are hungrie. The
sixth was the knight of the stormes, whose helmet was round moulded like
the Moone, and all his armour like waues, whereon the shine of the Moone
sleightly siluerd, perfectly represented Mooneshine in the water, his
bases were the banks or shores that bounded in the streames. The spoke
was this, _Frustra picus_, as much to say, as fruitles seruice. On his
shield he set forth a lion driuen from his praie by a dunghill cocke.
The worde, _Non vi sed voce_, not by violence but by his voice.

The seuenth had lyke the gyants that sought to scale heauen in despight
of Jupiter, a mount ouerwhelming his head and whole bodie. His bases
outlayde with armes and legges which the skirts of that mountain left
vncouered. Under this did hee characterise a man desirous to climbe
to the heauen of honour, kept vnder with the mountaine of his princes
command, and yet had hee armes and legges exempted from the suppression
of the mountaine. The word, _Tu mihi criminis author_ (alluding to his
Princes commaund) thou art the occasion of my imputed cowardise. His
horse was trapt in the earthie stringes of tree rootes, which though
their increase was stubbed downe to the grounde, yet were they not
vtterly deaded, but hop'd for an after resurrection. The worde, _Spe
alor_, I hope for a spring. Uppon his shield hee bare a ball striken
downe with a mans hand that it might mount The worde, _Ferior vt
efferar_, I suffer my selfe to bee contemned because I will climbe. The
eighth had all his armour throughout engrayled lyke a crabbed brierie
hawthorne bush, out of which notwithstanding sprung (as a good Childe
of an ill Father) fragraunt Blossomes of delightfull Maye Flowers, that
made (according to the nature of Maye) a most odoriferous smell. In
middest of this his snowie curled top, rounde wrapped together, on the
ascending of his creast sate a solitarie nightingale close encaged with
a thorne at her breast, hauing this mot in her mouth, _Luctus monumenta
manebunt_. At the foote of this bush represented on his bases, lay a
number of blacke swolne Toades gasping for winde, and Summer liu'de
grashoppers gaping after deaw, both which were choakt with excessiue
drouth, and for want of shade. The word, _Nan sine vulnere viresco_, I
spring not without impediments, alluding to the Toades and such lyke,
that earst laye sucking at his rootes, but nowe were turnd out, and
neere choakt with drought His horse was suited in blacke sandie earth
(as adiacent to this bush) which was here and there patched with short
burnt grasse, and as thicke inke dropped with toyling ants & emets
as euer it might crall, who in the full of the summer moone, (ruddie
garnished on his horses forehead) hoorded vp theyr prouision of grain
agaynst winter. The word _Victrix fortuno sapientia_, prouidence
preuents misfortune. On his shield he set forth the picture of death
doing almes deeds to a number of poore desolate children. The word,
_Nemo alius explicate_ No other man takes pittie vpon vs. What his
meaning was heerein I cannot imagine, except death had done him and his
brethren some greate good turne in ridding them of some vntoward parent
or kinsman that woulde haue beene their confusion, for else I cannot see
howe death shoulde haue beene sayde to doe almes deedes, except he
had depriued them sodainly of their liues, to deliuer them out of some
further miserie, which coulde not in anie wise bee because they were yet
liuing.

The ninth was the infant knight, who on his armour had ennameld a poore
young infant, put into a shippe without tackling, masts, furniture, or
any thing. This weather beaten and ill apparelled shippe was shaddowed
on his bases, and the slender compasse of his body set forth the right
picture of an infant The waues wherein the ship was tossed were fretted
on his steads trappings so mouingly, that euer as he offered to bounde
or stirre, they seemed to bounse, and tosse, and sparkle brine out of
theyr hoarie siluer billowes. Theyr mot, _Inopem me copia fecit_, as
much to saie, as the rich praye makes the theefe.

On his shielde hee expressed an olde Goate that made a young tree to
wither onely with biting it. The worde thereto _Primo extinguor in ouo_,
I am frostbitten ere I come out of the blade.

It were here too tedious to manifest all the discontented or amorous
deuises yt were vsed in that turnament. The shieldes onely of some few
I wil touch to make short worke. One bare for his impresse the eies of
yong swallowes comming againe after they were pluckt out, with this mot,
_Et addit et addimit_, your beautie both bereaues and restores my sight.
Another a siren smiling when the sea rageth and ships are ouerwhelmed,
including a cruell woman, that laughs, singes and scornes at her louers
tears, and the tempests of his despaire, the word _Cuncta pereunt_,
all my labor is ill imploid. A third being troubled with a curst, a
trecherous and wanton wanton wife, vsed this similitude. On his shild he
caused to be limmed _Pompeies_ ordinance for paracides, as namely a man
put into a sack with a cocke, a serpent and an ape, interpreting that
his wife was a cocke for her crowing, a serpent for her stinging, and an
ape for her vnconstant wantonnesse, with which ill qualities hee was
so beset, that thereby hee was throwen into a sea of grief. The worde
_Extremum malorum mulier_, The vtmost of euils is a woman. A fourth,
who being a person of suspected religion, was continually hanted with
intelligencers and spies that thought to praie vppon him for that hee
had, he could not deuise which waie to shape them off, but by making
away that he had. To obscure this, hee vsed no other fansie but a number
of blinde flies, whose eies the colde had closed, the word _Aurum reddit
acutissimum_, Gold is the onely phisicke for the eiesight A fifth, whose
mistres was fallen into a consumption, and yet would condiscend to no
treatie of loue, emblazond for his complaint, grapes that witherd for
want of pressing. The dittie to the mot, _Quid regna sine vsu_. I will
rehearse no more, but I haue an hundred other, let this be the vpshot
of these shewes, they were the admirablest that euer Florence yelded. To
particularize their maner of encounter, were to describe the whol art of
tilting. Some had like to haue falle ouer their horse neck and so breake
their neckes in breaking their staues. Others ranne at a buckle in stead
of a button, & peraduenture whetted their spears pointes, idlely gliding
on their enemies sides, but did no other harme. Others ranne a crosse at
theyr aduersaries left elbow, yea, and by your leaue sometimes let not
the lists scape scot-free they were so eager. Others because they
would be sure not to be vnsadled with the shocke, when they came to the
speares vtmost proofe, they threw it ouer the right shoulder, and so
tilted backward, for forwarde they durst not Another had a monstrous
spite at the pommell of his riuals saddle, and thought to haue thrust
his speare twixt his legges without rasing anie skinne, and carried
him cleane awaie on it as a coolestaffe. Another held his speare to
his nose, or his nose to his speare, as though he had ben discharging a
caliuer, and ranne at the right foote of his fellowes stead. Onely the
earle of Surry my master obserued y true measures of honor, and made all
his encounterers new scoure their armor in the dust. So great was his
glorie y daie, as _Geraldine_ was therby etemally glorifide. Neuersuch
a bountifull master came amongst the heralds (not that he did inrich the
with anie plentifull purse largesse) but that by his sterne assaultes
hee tithed them more rich offals of bases, of helmets, of armour, than
the rent of their offices came to in ten yeres before. What would you
haue more, the trumpets proclaimed him master of the field, the trumpets
proclaimed _Geraldine_ the exceptionlesse fayrest of women. Euerie one
striued to magnifie him more than other. The Duke of Florence, whose
name (as my memorie serueth me) was _Paschal de Medices_, offered him
such large proffers to staie with him as it were vncredible to report
He would not, his desire was as hee had done in Florence, so to proceede
throughout all the chiefe cities in Italy. If you aske why he began not
this at Venice first. It was because he would let Florence his mistres
natiue citie haue the maidenhead of his chiualrie. As hee came backe
againe hee thought to haue enacted something there worthie the Annals
of posteritie, but he was debard both of that and all his other
determinations, for continuing in feasting and banketting with the Duke
of Florence and the Princes of Italy there assembled, posthast letters
came to him from the king his master, to returne as speedily as he could
possible into England, wherby his fame was quite cut off by the shins,
and there was no repriue but _Bazelus manus_, hee must into England, and
I with my curtizan trauelled forward in Italy.

What aduentures happened him after we parted, I am ignorant, but
Florence we both forsooke, and I hauing a wonderful ardent inclination
to see Rome the Queen of the world, & metrapolitane mistres of all other
cities, made thether with my bag and baggage as fast as I could.

Attained thether, I was lodged at the house of one _Iohannes de Imola_ a
Roman caualiero. Who being acquainted with my curtisans deceased doting
husband, for his sake vsd vs with all the familiaritie that might be. He
shewed vs all the monuments that were to be seene, which are as many
as ther haue beene Emperours, Consuls, Orators, Conquerours, famous
painters or plaiers in Rome. Till this daie not a Romane (if he be a
right Romane in deed) will kill a rat, but he will haue some registred
remembrance of it There was a poore fellowe during my remainder ther,
that for a new trick he had inuented of killing _Cymess_ & scorpions,
had his mountebank banner hung vp on a high piller, with an inscription
about it longer than the king of Spaines stile. I thought these
_Cymesses_ like the Cimbrians had bene some strange nation hee had
brought vnder, & they were no more but things like sheepelice, which
aliue haue the venomost sting that may be, and being dead do stinke out
of measure. Saint Austen compareth heretiques vnto them. The chiefest
thing that my eyes delighted in, was the church of the 7. Sibels, which
is a most miraculous thing. All their prophesies and oracles being there
enroulde, as also the beginning and ending of their whole catalogue of
the heathen Gods, with their manner of worship. There are a number of
other shrines and statues also dedicated to their Emperors, and withal
some statues of idolatrie reserued for detestation. I was at _Pontius
Pilates_ house and pist against it There is the prison yet packt vp
together (an old rotten thing) where the man that was condemned to
death, and could haue no bodie come to him and succour him but was
searcht, was kept aliue a long space by sucking his daughters breasts.

These are but the shop dust of the sights that I saw, and in truth I dyd
not beholde with anie care hereafter to report, but contented my eie for
the present, and so let them passe. Should I memorize halfe the myracles
which they there tolde me had beene done about martyres tombes, or the
operations of the earth of the sepulchre, and other reliques brought
from Jerusalem, I should bee counted the monstrous Her that euer came in
print.

The mines of _Pompeies_ theater, reputed one of the nine wonders of the
worlde, _Gregory_ the sixths Tombe, _Priscillas_ Grate, or the thousands
of Piliers arreared amongst the raced foundations of old _Rome_, it were
heere friuolous to specifie: since he that hath but once drunke with
a traueller talkes of them. Let mee bee a Historiographer of my owne
misfortunes, and not meddle with the continued Trophees of so olde a
triumphing Citie.

At my first comming to _Rome_, I being a youth of the English cut, ware
my haire long, went apparailed in light coulours, and imitated foure or
fiue sundrie Nations in my attyre at once: which no sooner was noated,
but I had all the boyes of the Citie in a swarme wondering about mee. I
had not gone a little farther, but certaine Officers crost the waie of
me, and demanded to see my rapier: which when they found (as also my
dagger) with his poynt vnblunted, they would haue hal'd me headlong to
the Strappado, but that with money I appeased them: and my fault was
more pardonable in that I was a stranger, altogether ignorant of their
customes.

Note by the waye, that it is the vse in _Rome_, for all men whatsoeuer
to weafe their haire short: which they doo not so much for conscience
sake, or anie religion they place in it, but because the extremitie of
the heate is such there, that if they should not doo so, they should not
haue a haire left on their heads to stand vpright, when they were scard
with sprights. And hee is counted no Gentleman amongst them that goes
not in black: they dresse their iesters and fooles onely in fresh
colours, and say variable garments doo argue vnstayednes and
vnconstancie of affections.

The reason of their straight ordinaunce of carrying weapons without
points is this. The _Bandettos_ which are certaine outlawes that lye
betwixt _Rome & Naples_, and besiege the passage that none can trauell
that way without robbing: Now and then hired for some few crownes, they
wil steale to Rome and doe a murther, and betake them to their heeles
againe. Disguised as they go, they are not knowen from strangers,
sometimes they will shroude themselues vnder the habite of graue
citizens. In this consideration neither citizen nor stranger, gentleman,
knight, marques, or any may weare anie weapon endamageable vppon paine
of the strappado. I bought it out, let others buy experience of me
better cheape.

To tell you of the rare pleasures of their gardens, theyr baths, their
vineyards, their galleries, were to write a second part of the gorgeous
Gallerie of gallant deuices. Why, you should not come into anie mans
house of account, but hee had fishponds and litle orchards on the top of
his leads. If by rain or anie other meanes those ponds were so full they
need to bee fluste or let out, euen of their superfluities they made
melodious vse, for they had great winde instruments in stead of leaden
spoutes, that went duely in consort, onely with this waters rumbling
discent I saw a summer banketting house belonging to a marchant, that
was the meruaile of the worlde, & could not be matcht except God should
make another paradise. It was builte rounde of greene marble, like a
Theater without, within there was a heauen and earth comprehended both
vnder one roofe, the heauen was a cleere ouerhanging vault of christall,
wherein the Sunne and Moone, and each visible Starre had his true
similitude, shine, scituation, and motion, and by what enwrapped arte
I cannot conceiue, these spheares in their proper orbes obserued
their circular wheelings and turnings, making a certaine kinde of soft
angelical murmering musicke in their often windings & going about, which
musick the philosophers say in the true heauen by reason of the grosenes
of our senses we are not capable of. For the earth it was counterfeited
in that likenes that Adam lorded out it before his fall. A wide vast
spacious roome it was, such as we would conceit prince Arthurs hall to
be, where he feasted all his knightes of the round table together euerie
penticost The floore was painted with y beautifullest floures that euer
mans eie admired, which so lineally wer delineated, that he that viewd
them a farre off, and had not directly stood poaringly ouer them, would
haue sworne they had liued in deede. The wals round about were hedgde
with Oliues and palme trees, and all other odoriferous fruit-bearing
plants, which at anie solemne intertainment dropt mirrhe and
frankensence. Other trees y bare no fruit, were set in iust order one
against another, and diuided the roome into a number of shadie lanes,
leauing but one ouer-spreading pine tree arbour, where wee sate and
banketted. On the well clothed boughes of this conspiracie of pine
trees against the resembled Sunne beames, were pearcht as many sortes
of shrill breasted birdes, as the Summer hath allowed for singing men
in her siluane chappels. Who though there were bodies without soules,
& sweete resembled substances without sense, yet by the mathemeticall
experimentes of long siluer pipes secretly inrinded in the intrailes of
the boughs whereon they sate, and vndiscerneablie conuaid vnder their
bellies into their small throats sloaping, they whistled and freely
carold theyr naturall field note. Neyther went those siluer pipes
straight, but by many edged vnsundred writhings, & crankled wandrings
aside strayed from bough to bough into an hundred throates. But into
this siluer pipe so writhed and wandering aside, if anie demand how the
wind was breathed. Forsoth ye tail of the siluer pipe stretcht it
selfe into the mouth of a great paire of bellowes, where it was close
soldered, and bailde about with yron, it coulde not stirre or haue
anie vent betwixt. Those bellowes with the rising and falling of leaden
plummets wounde vp on a wheele, dyd beate vp and downe vncessantly, and
so gathered in wind, seruing with one blast all the snarled pipes to
and fro of one tree at once. But so closely were all those organizing
implements obscured in the corpulent trunks of the trees, that euerie
man there present renounst coniectures of art, and sayd it was done by
inchantment.

One tree for his fruit bare nothing but inchained chiriping birdes,
whose throates beeing conduit pipt with squared narrow shels, & charged
siring-wise with searching sweet water, driuen in by a little wheele for
the nonce, and fed it afarre of, made a spirting sound, such as chirping
is, in bubling vpwards through the rough crannies of their closed bils.

Under tuition of the shade of euerie tree that I haue signified to be in
this round hedge, on delightfull leauie cloysters, lay a wylde tyrannous
beast asleepe all prostrate: vnder some two together, as the Dogge
nusling his nose vnder the necks of the Deare, the Wolfe glad to let the
Lambe lye vpon hym to keepe him warme, the Lyon suffering the Asse to
cast hys legge ouer him: preferring one honest vnmannerly frend, before
a number of croutching picke-thankes. No poysonous beast there reposed,
(poyson was not before our parent _Adam_ transgressed). There were no
sweete-breathing Panthers, that would hyde their terrifying heads to
betraye: no men imitating _Hyonaes_. that chaunged their sexe to seeke
after bloud. Wolues as now when they are hungrie eate earth, so then
did they feede on earth onely, and abstained from innocent flesh. The
Unicorne did not put his home into the streame to chase away venome
before he drunke, for there was no such thing as venome extant in the
water or on the earth. Serpents were as harmlesse to mankinde, as
they are still one to another: the rose had no cankers, the leaues no
caterpillers, the sea no _Syrens_, the earth no vsurers. Goates then
bare wooll, as it is recorded in _Sicily_ they doo yet. The torride
Zone was habitable; onely Jayes loued to steale gold and siluer to build
their nests withall, and none cared for couetous clientrie, or running
to the Indies. As the Elephant vnderstands his countrey speach, so
euerie beast vnderstood what men spoke. The ant did not hoord vp against
winter, for there was no winter but a perpetuall spring, as _Ouid_
sayth. No frosts to make the greene almond tree counted rash and
improuident, in budding soonest of all other: or the mulberie tree a
strange polititian, in blooming late and ripening early. The peach tree
at the first planting was frutefull and wholesome, wheras now til it be
transplanted, it is poysonous and hatefull. Yong plants for their sap
had balme, for their yeolow gumme glistering amber. The euening deawd
not water on flowers, but honnie. Such a golden age, such a good age,
such an honest age was set foorth in this banquetting house.

O _Rome_, if thou hast in thee such soule-exalting obiects: what a
thing is heauen in comparison of thee, of which _Mercators_ globe is a
perfecter modell than thou art? Yet this I must say to the shame of vs
Protestants, if good workes may merit heauen, they doo them, we talke of
them. Whether superstition or no makes the vnprofitable seruants,
that let pulpets decide: but there, you shall haue the brauest Ladies in
gownes of beaten gold, washing pilgrimes and poore souldiours feete
and dooing nothing they and their wayting mayds all the yeare long, but
making shirts and bandes for them against they come by in distresse.
Their hospitalls are more like noblemens houses than otherwise: so
richly furnished, cleane kept, and hot perfumed, that a souldiour would
thinke it a sufficient recompence for his trauell and his wounds, to
haue such a heauenly retyring place. For the Pope and his pontificalibus
I will not deale with, onely I will dilate vnto you what hapned whiles I
was in _Rome_.

So it fell out, that it being a vehement hot summer when I was a
soiourner there, there entred such a hotspurd plague as hath not been
heard of: why it was but a word and a blow, Lord haue mercie vpon vs,
and he was gone. Within three quarters of a yere in that one citie there
dyed of it a hundred thousand: Looke in _Lanquets_ Chronicle and you
shall finde it. To smell of a nosegay, that was poysond: and turne your
nose to a house, that had the plague, it was all one. The clouds like
a number of cormorants, that keepe their corne till it stinke and is
mustie, kept in their stinking exhalations, till they had almost stifled
all _Romes_ inhabitants. Phisitions, greedines of golde made them
greedie of their destinie. They would come to visite those, with whose
infirmities their arte had no affinitie: and euen as a man with a fee
should bee hyred to hang himselfe, so would they quietly goe home and
dye presently after they had been with their patients. All day and all
night long carremen did nothing but goe vp and downe the streetes with
their carts and crye, Haue you anie dead to burie, haue you anie dead
to burie: and had manie times out of one house their whole loading: one
graue was the sepulcher of seuenscore, one bed was the altar whereon
whole families were offered.

The wals were hoard and furd with the moist scorching steam of their
desolation. Euen as before a gun is shot off, a stinking smoake funnels
out, and prepares the waie for him, so before anie gaue vp the ghost,
death araied in a stinking smoke stopt his nostrils, and cramd it selfe
full into his mouth, that closed vp his fellowes eyes, to giue him
warning to prepare for his funeral. Some dide sitting at their meate,
others as they were asking counsell of the phisition for their friendes.
I saw at the house where I was hosted, a maide bring her master warme
broth for to comfort him, and she sinke downe dead her self ere he had
halfe eate it vp.

During this time of visitation, there was a Spaniard, one _Esdras_ of
Granado, a notable Bandetto, authorized by ye pope, because he assisted
him in some murthers. This villain colleagued with one _Bartol_ a
desperate Italian, practised to breake into those rich mens houses in
the night where the plague had most rained, and if there were none but
the mistres and maid left aliue, to rauish them both, and bring awaie
all the wealth they could fasten on. In a hundred chief citizens houses
where the hand of God had bin, they put this outrage in vse. Thogh the
women so rauished cride out, none durst come nere them, for feare of
catching their deaths by them, & some thought they cried out onely with
the tyrannie of the maladie. Amongst the rest the house where I lay he
inuaded, where all being snatcht vp by the sicknesse but the good wife
of the house, a noble and chast matrone called _Heraclide_ and her
_Zanie_, and I & my curtizan, he knocking at the dore late in the night,
ranne in to the matrone, & left me and my loue to the mercie of his
companion. Who finding me in bed (as the time requird) ranne at me full
with his rapier, thinking I would resist him, but as good lucke was
I escapt him & betooke me to my pistoll in the window vncharged. He
fearing it had bene charged, threatned to run her through if I once
offered but to aime at him, Foorth ye chamber he dragd her, holding his
rapier at hir hart, whilest I stil crid out, Saue her, kil me, & Ile
ransome her with a thousand duckets: but lust preuailed, no praiers
would be heard. Into my chamber I was lockt, and watchmen charged (as he
made semblance when there was none there) to knocke me downe with their
halberdes, if I stirde but a foote downe the staires. So threw I my
selfe pensiue againe on my pallat, and dard all the deuils in hell now I
was alone to come and fight with me one after another in defence of that
detestable rape. I beat my head against the wals and cald them bauds,
because they wold see such a wrong committed, and not fall vpon him.
To returne to _Heraclide_ below, whom the vgliest of all bloud suckers
_Esdras of Granado_ had vnder shrift. First he assayled her with rough
meanes, and slew her _Zanie_ at her foote, that stept before her in
rescue. Then when al armed resist was put to flight, he assaied her with
honie speech, & promised her more iewells and giftes than hee was able
to pilfer in an hundred yeres after. He discourst vnto her how he was
countenanced and borne out by the pope, and how many execrable murthers
with impunitie he had executed on them that displeasde him. This is the
eight score house (quoth he) that hath done homage vnto me, and here I
will preuaile, or I will bee torne in pieces. Ah quoth _Heraclide_ (with
a hart renting sigh) art thou ordaind to be a worse plague to me than ye
plague it selfe? Haue I escapt the hands of God to fal into the hands of
man? Heare me _Iehouah_, & be merciful in ending my miserie. Dispatch
me incontinent dissolute homicide deaths vsurper. Here lies my husband
stone colde on the dewie floore. If thou beest of more power than God,
to strike me speedily, strike home, strike deep, send me to heauen
with my husband. Aie me, it is the spoyl of my honor thou seekest in my
soules troubled departure, thou art some deuill sent to tempt me. Auoide
from me sathan, my soule is my sauiours, to him I haue bequeathed it,
from him can no man take it. Jesu, Jesu spare mee vndefiled for thy
spouse, Jesu, Jesu neuer faile those that put their trust in thee. With
that she fell in a sowne, and her eies in their closing seemed to spaune
forth in their outward sharpe corners new created seed pearle, which the
world before neuer set eie on. Soone he rigorously reuiued her, & tolde
her yt he had a charter aboue scripture, she must yeld, she should yeld,
see who durst remoue her out of his hands. Twixt life and death thus she
faintly replied. How thinkest thou, is there a power aboue thy power,
if there be, he is here present in punishment, and on thee will take
present punishment if thou persistest in thy enterprise. In the tyme of
securitie euerie man sinneth, but when death substitutes one frend his
special bayly to arrest another by infection, and dispearseth his quiuer
into ten thousand hands at once, who is it but lookes about him? A man
that hath an vneuitable huge stone hanging only by a haire ouer his
head, which he lookes euerie Pater noster while to fall and pash him in
peeces, will not he be submissiuely sorrowfull for his transgressions,
refraine himselfe from the least thought of folly, and purifie his
spirit with contrition and penitence? Gods hand like a huge stone hangs
vneuitably ouer thy head: what is the plague, but death playing the
prouost marshall, to execute all those that wil not be called home
by anie other meanes. This my deare knights body is a quiuer of his
arrowes, which alreadie are shot into thee inuisible. Euen as the age of
goates is knowen by the knots on their homes, so think the anger of God
apparently visioned or showne vnto thee in the knitting of my browes.
A hundred haue I buried out of my house, at all whose departures I haue
been present: a hundreds infection is mixed with my breath, loe, now
I breath vpon thee, a hundred deaths come vpon thee. Repent betimes,
imagine there is a hell though not a heauen: that hell thy conscience is
throughly acquainted with, if thou hast murdred halfe so manie, as thou
vnblushingly braggest. As _Mocenas_ in the latter end of his dayes
was seuen yeres without sleepe, so these seuen weekes haue I took
no slumber, my eyes haue kept continuall watch against the diuell my
enemie: death I deemed my frend (frends flie from vs in aduersitie),
death, the diuell & al the ministring spirits of temptation are watching
about thee to intrap thy soule by my abuse to eternall damnation. It is
thy soule only thou maist saue by sauing mine honor.

Death will haue thy bodie infallibly for breaking into my house, that he
had selected for his priuate habitation. If thou euer camst of a woman,
or hop'st to be sau'd by the seed of a woman, spare a woman. Deares
oppressed with dogs, when they cannot take soyle, runne to men for
succor: to whom should women in their disconsolate and desperate estate
run, but to men like the Deare for succour and sanctuarie. If thou bee
a man thou wilt succour me, but if thou be a dog & a brute beast, thou
wilt spoile me, defile me & teare me: either renounce Gods image, or
renounce the wicked minde that thou bearest.

These words might haue moou'd a compound hart of yron and adamant, but
in his hart they obtained no impression: for he sitting in his chaire
of state against the doore all the while that she pleaded, leaning his
ouerhanging gloomie eybrowes on the pommell of his vnsheathed sword, hee
neuer lookt vp or gaue her a word: but when he perceiued shee expected
his answere of grace or vtter perdition, he start vp and took her
currishly by the neck, and askt her how long he should stay for her
Ladiship.

Thoutelst me (quoth he) of the plague, and the heauie hand of God, and
thy hundred infected breaths in one: I tel thee I haue cast the dice an
hundred times for the galleyes in _Spaine_, and yet still mist the
ill chance. Our order of casting is this, If there bee a generall
or captaine new come home from the warres, & hath some foure or fiue
hundred crownes ouerplus of the kings in his hand, & his souldiors al
paid, he makes proclamation, that whatsoeuer two resolute men will goe
to dice for it, and win the bridle or lose the saddle, to such a place
let them repaire, and it shall be ready for them. Thither go I & finde
another such needie squire resident. The dice runne, I win, he is
vndone. I winning haue the crownes, he loosing is carried to the
galleys. This is our custome, which a hundred times and more hath paid
mee custome of crownes, when the poore fellowes haue gone to _Gehenna_,
had course bread and whipping chere all their life after. Now thinkest
thou that I who so oft haue escapd such a number of hellish dangers,
only depending on the turning of a few pricks, can be scarebugd with
the plague? what plague canst thou name worse than I haue had? whether
diseases, imprisonment, pouertie, banishment, I haue past through them
all. My owne mother gaue I a box of the eare to, and brake her neck down
a pair of stairs, because she would not go in to a gentleman, when I bad
her: my sister I solde to an olde Leno, to make his best of her: anie
kinswoman that I haue, knew I shee were not a whore, my selfe would make
her one: thou art a whore, thou shalt bee a whore in spite of religion
or precise ceremonies.

Therewith he flew vpon her, and threatned her with his sword, but it
was not that he meant to wounde her with. Hee graspt her by the iuorie
throate, and shooke her as a mastiffe would shake a yong beare, swearing
& flaring he would teare out her wesand if she refused. Not content with
that sauage constraint, he slipt his sacriligious hand from her lilly
lawne skinned necke, and inscarfte it in her long siluer lockes, which
with strugling were vnrould. Backward hee dragd her, euen as a man
backward would plucke a tree downe by the twigs, and then like a traitor
that is drawen to execution on a hurdle, he traileth her vp and downe
the chamber by those tender vntwisted braids, and setting his barbarous
foote on her bare snowie breast, bad her yeeld or haue her wind stampt
out She crid, stamp, stifle me in my hair, hang me vp by it on a beame,
and so let mee die rather than I shoulde go to heauen wyth a beame in
my eie. No (quoth he) nor stampt, nor stifled, nor hanged, nor to heauen
shalt thou go til I haue had my wil of thee, thy busie armes in these
silken fetters Ile infold. Dismissing her haire from his fingers, and
pinnioning her elbowes therwithal, she strugled, she wrested, but al was
in vain. So strugling & so resisting, her iewels did sweate, signifieng
there was poison comming towards her. On the hard boords hee threw her,
and vsed his knee as an yron ram to beate ope the two leaude gate of her
chastitie. Her husbands dead bodie he made a pillow to his abhomination.
Coniecture the rest, my words sticke fast in the mire and are cleane
tyred, would I had neuer vndertooke this tragicall tale. Whatsoeuer is
borne is borne to haue end. Thus endeth my tale, his boorish lust was
glutted, his beastly desire satisfied, what in the house of any worth
was carriageable, he put vp and went his way.

Let not your sorow die, you that haue read the proeme and narration of
this elegiacal history. Shew you haue quick wits in sharpe conceit of
compassion. A woman that hath viewd all her children sacrificed before
her eies, & after the first was slaine wipt the sword with her apron to
prepare it for the clenly murther of the second, and so on forwarde till
came to the empiercing of the seuenteenth of her loines, will you not
giue her great allowance of anguish. This woman, this matrone, this
forsaken _Heraclide_, hauing buried fourteene children in fiue dayes,
whose eyes she howlingly closed, and caught many wrinckles with funerall
kisses: besides, hauing her husband within a day after layd forth as
a comfortlesse corse, a carrionly blocke, that could neither eate with
her, speak with her, nor weepe with her, is she not to be borne withall
though her bodie swells wyth a tympanie of teares, though her speach be
as impatient as vnhappy _Hecubaes_, though her head raues and her braine
doates? Deuise with your selues that you see a corse rising from
his heirce after hee is carried to Church, and such another suppose
_Heraclide_ to bee, rising from the couch of enforced adulterie.

Her eyes were dimme, her cheekes bloudlesse, her breath smelt earthie,
her countenance was ghastly. Up she rose after she was deflowred, but
loath she arose, as a reprobate soule rising to the day of iudgement.
Looking on the tone side as she rose, she spide her husbands bodie lying
vnder her head: Ah then she bewayled as _Cephaius_ when hee had kild
_Procris_ vnwittingly, or _Oedipus_ when ignorant he had slaine his owne
father, and knowen his mother incestuously. This was her subdued reasons
discourse.

Haue I liu'd to make my husbands bodie the beere to carry me to hell,
had filthie pleasure no other pillowe to leane vpon but his spreaded
limmes? On thy flesh my fault shall bee imprinted at the day of
resurrection. O beauty, the bait ordained to insnare the irreligious:
rich men are robd for theyr welth, women are dishonested for being too
faire. No blessing is beautie but a curse: curst bee the time that euer
I was begotten: curst be the time that my mother brought me forth to
tempt. The serpent in paradice did no more, the serpent in paradice
is damned sempiternally: why should not I hold my selfe damned (if
predestinations opinions be true) that am predestinate to this horrible
abuse. The hogge dieth presently if he loseth an eye: with the hogge
haue I wallowed in the myre, I haue lost my eye of honestie, it is
cleane pluckt out with a strong hand of vnchastitie: what remaineth but
I dye? Die I will, though life be vnwilling: no recompence is there
for mee to redeeme my compelled offence, but with a rigorous compelled
death. Husband, He be thy wife in heauen: let not thy pure deceasing
spirite despise me when we meete, because I am tyrannously polluted.
The diuell, the belier of our frayltie, and common accuser of mankinde,
cannot accuse me though he would of vnconstrained submitting. If anie
guilt be mine, this is my fault, that I did not deforme my face, ere it
shuld so impiously allure. Hauing passioned thus a while, she hastely
ranne and lookt her selfe in her glasse to see if her sinne were not
written on her forhead: with looking shee blusht though none lookt vpon
her but her owne reflected image.

Then began she againe. _Heu quam difficile est crimen non prodere
vultu_; How hard is it not to bewray a mans fault by his forhead. My
selfe doo but behold my selfe, and yet I blush: then God beholding me,
shall not I bee ten times more ashamed? The Angells shall hisse at mee,
the Saints and Martyrs flye from me: yea, God himselfe shall adde to
the diuels damnation, because he suffred such a wicked creature to come
before him. _Agamemnon_ thou wert an infidell, yet when thou wentst to
the Troian warre, thou leftst a Musitian at home with thy wife, who
by playing the foote _Spondous_ tyll thy returne, might keepe her in
chastitie. My husband going to warre with the diuell and his enticements
when hee surrendred, left no musition with me but mourning and
melancholy: had he left anie, as _Aegistus_ kild _Agamemnons_ musition
ere he could be succesfull, so surely would he haue been kild ere this
_Aegistus_ surceased. My distressed heart as the Hart when he looseth
his homes is astonied, and sorrowfullie runneth to hide himselfe, so bee
thou afflicted and distressed, hide thy selfe vnder the Almighties wings
of mercie: sve, plead, intreate, grace is neuer denyed to them that
aske. It may be denied, I may be a vessell ordained to dishonor. The
onely repeale we haue from Gods vndefinite chastisement, is to chastise
our selues in this world: and so I will, nought but death bee my
pennance, gracious and acceptable may it bee: my hand and my knife shall
manumit me out of the horror of minde I endure. Farewell life that hast
lent me nothing but sorrow: farewell sinne sowed flesh, that hast more
weeds than flowers, more woes than ioyes.

Point pierce, edge enwyden, I patiently affoord thee a sheath: spurre
foorth my soule to mount poast to heauen. Jesu forgiue me, Jesu receiue
me.

So throughly stabd fell she downe, and knockt her head against her
husbands bodie: wherewith, hee not hauing beene ayred his full foure and
twentie houres, start as out of a dreame: whiles I through a crannie of
my vpper chamber vnseeled, had beheld all this sad spectacle. Awaking,
hee rubd his head too and fro, and wyping his eyes with his hand began
to looke about him. Feeling some thing lye heauie on his breast, he
turnd it off, and getting vpon his legges lighted a candle.

Heere beginneth my purgatorie. For he good man comming into the hall
with the candle, and spying his wife wyth her haire about her eares
defiled and massacred, and his simple _Zanie Capestrano_ run thorough,
tooke a halberde in hys hand, and running from chamber to chamber to
search who in his house was likely to doo it, at length found me
lying on my bed, the doore lockt to me on the outside, and my rapier
vnsheathed on the windowe: wherewith hee straight coniectured it was I.
And calling the neighbours harde by, sayd I had caused my selfe to bee
lockt into my chamber after that sort, sent awaye my curtizane whome
I called my wife, and made cleane my rapier, because I would not bee
suspected. Uppon this was I laide in prison, should haue been hanged,
was brought to the ladder, had made a ballet for my farewell in a
readines called _Wiltons wantonnes_, and yet for all that scap'd dancing
in a hempen circle. He that hath gone through manie perils and returned
safe from them, makes but a merriment to dilate them. I had the knot
vnder my eare, there was faire playe, the hangman had one halter, and
another about my necke, which was fastned to the gallowes, the riding
deuice was almost thrust home, and his foote on my shoulder to presse
me downe, when I made my saint-like confession as you haue heard before,
that such & such men at such an houre brake into the house, slew the
Zanie, tooke my curtizan, lockt me into my chamber, rauisht _Heraclide_,
and finally how shee slew her selfe.

Present at the execution was there a banisht English Earle, who hearing
that a countreyman of his was to suffer for such a notable murder, came
to heare his confession, and see if hee knew him. He had not heard me
tell halfe of that I haue recited, but hee craued audience, and desired
the execution might be staid.

Not two dayes since it is Gentlemen and noble _Romanes_ (said he) since
going to be let bloud in a barbars shop agaynst the infection, all on
a suddaine in a great tumult and vproare was there brought in one
_Bartoll_ an _Italian_ greeuously wounded and bloudie. I seeming to
commiserate his harmes, courteously questiond him with what ill debters
he had met, or how or by what casualtie he came to be so arraid. O quoth
he long I haue liu'd sworne brothers in sensualitie with one _Esdras of
Granado_, fiue hundred rapes and murders haue wee committed betwixt vs.
When our iniquities were growen to the height, and God had determined to
counterchecke our amitie, wee came to the house of _Iohannes de Imola_
(whom this yong gentleman hath named) there did he iustifie al those
rapes in manner and forme as the prisoner here hath confest. But loe
an accident after, which neither he nor this audience is priuie too.
_Esdras of Granado_ not content to haue rauisht the matrone _Heraclide_
and robd her, after he had betooke hym from thence to his heeles, light
on his companion _Bartol_ with his curtizan: whose pleasing face hee had
scarce winkingly glaunc'd on, but hee pickt a quarrell with _Bartoll_ to
haue her from him. On this quarrell they fought _Bartoll_ was wounded
to the death, _Esdras_ fled, and the faire dame left to go whither she
would. This _Bartoll_ in the barbars shoppe freely acknowledged, as
both the barbar and his man, and other heere present can amply depose.
Deposed they were, their oathes went for currant, I was quit by
proclamation, to the banisht Earle I came to render thankes: when thus
he examind me and schoold me.

Countriman, tell mee what is the occasion of thy straying so farre out
of _England_ to visit this strange Nation. If it bee languages, thou
maist learne them at home, nought but lasciuiousnes is to be learned
here. Perhaps to be better accounted of than other of thy condition,
thou ambitiously vndertakest this voyage: these insolent fancies are but
_Icarus_ fethers, whose wanton wax melted against the sunne, will betray
thee into a sea of confusion. The first traueller was _Cayn_, and hee
was called a vagabond runnagate on the face of the earth. Trauaile like
the trauaile wherein smithes put wilde horses when they shoo them, is
good for nothing but to tame and bring men vnder. God had no greater
curse to lay vppon the _Israelites_, than by leading them out of their
owne countrey to liue as slaues in a strange land. That which was their
curse, we Englishmen count our chief blessednes; he is no body that hath
not traueld: wee had rather liue as slaues in another land, croutch and
cap, and bee seruile to euerie iealous Italians and proude Spaniards
humor, where wee may neyther speake looke nor doo anie thing, but what
pleaseth them, than liue as freemen and Lords in our owne countrey. He
that is a traueller must haue the backe of an asse to beare all, a tung
like the tayle of a dog to flatter all, the mouth of a hog to eate what
is set before him, the eare of a merchant to heare all and say nothing:
and if this be not the highest step of thraldome, there is no libertie
or freedome. It is but a milde kind of subiection to be the seruant of
one master at once, but when thou hast a thousand thousand masters,
as the veriest botcher, tinker or cobler freeborne wil dominere ouer a
forreiner, & think to bee his better or master in company: then shalt
thou finde theres no such hell, as to leaue thy fathers house (thy
natural habitation) to liue in the land of bondage. If thou doest but
lend halfe a looke to a Romans or Italians wife, thy porredge shall bee
prepared for thee, and cost thee nothing but thy life. Chance some of
them breake a bitter iest on thee, and thou retortst it seuerly, or
seemest discontented: goe to thy chamber, & prouide a great banquet,
for thou shalt bee sure to bee visited with guests in a maske the next
night, when in kindnes and courtship thy throate shalbe cut, and the
doers returne vndiscouered. Nothing so long of memorie as a dog,
these Italians are old dogs, and will carrie an iniurie a whole age
in memorie: I haue heard of a box on the eare that hath been reuenged
thirtie yeare after. The Neopolitane carrieth the bloudiest wreakfull
minde, and is the most secrete flearing murderer. Whereupon it is growne
to a common prouerb, He giue him the Neapolitan shrug, when one meanes
to play the villaine, and makes no boast of it.

The onely precept that a traueller hath most vse of, and shall finde
most ease in, is that of _Epicharchusy Vigila & memor sis ne quid
credos_; Beleeue nothing, trust no man: yet seeme thou as thou
swallowedst all, suspectedst none, but wert easie to be gulled by euery
one. _Multi fallere docuerunt_ (as _Seneca_ saith) _dum timent falli_;
Many by showing their iealous suspect of deceit, haue made men seek more
subtill meanes to deceiue them.

Alas, our Englishmen are the plainest dealing soules that euer God put
life in: they are greedie of newes, and loue to be fed in their humors
and heare themselues flattered the best that may be. Euen as _Philemon_
a Comick Poet dyde with extreame laughter at the conceit of seeing an
Asse eate fygges: so haue the Italians no such sport, as to see poore
English asses how soberly they swallow Spanish figges deuour any hooke
baited for them. He is not fit to trauell, that cannot with the Candians
liue on serpents, make nourishing foode euen of poyson. Rats and mice
engender by licking one another, he must licke, he must croutch, he must
cogge, lye and prate, that either in the Court or a forraine Countrey
will engender and come to preferment. Bee his feature what it will,
if he be faire spoken he winneth frends: _Nonformosus erat, sed erat
facundus Vlysses; Vlysses_ the long traueller was not amiable, but
eloquent. Some alleadge, they trauell to learne wit, but I am of this
opinion, that as it is not possible for anie man to learne the Arte of
Memorie, whereof _Tully, Quintillian, Seneca, and Hermannus Buschius_
haue written so manie bookes, except he haue a naturall memorie before:
so is it not possible for anie man to attaine anie great wit by trauell,
except he haue the grounds of it rooted in him before. That wit which is
thereby to be perfected or made stayd, is nothing but _Experientia longa
malorum_; The experience of manie euills: the experience that such a
man lost his life by this folly, another by that: such a young Gallant
consumed his substance on such a Curtizan: these courses of reuenge a
Merchant of _Venice_ tooke against a Merchant of _Ferrara_: and this
poynt of iustice was shewed by the Duke vppon the murtherer. What is
heere but wee maye read in bookes and a great deale more too, without
stirring our feete out of a warme studie.

_Vobis alii ventorum prolia narrent,_ (saith Ouid) _Quasq; Scilla
infestat, quasue Charybdis aquas_. Let others tell you wonders of the
winde, How _Scalla_ or _Charybdis_ is enclinde.

     --_vos quod quisque loquetur Credite_
     --Beleeue you what they say, but neuer trie.

So let others tell you straunge accidents, treasons, poysonings, close
packings in _Frounce, Spaine and Italy_: it is no harme for you to
heare of them, but come not neere them. What is there in _Fraunce_ to
be learnd more than in _England_, but falshood in fellowship, perfect
slouenrie, to loue no man but for my pleasure, to sweare _Ah par la mort
Dieu_ when a mans hammes are scabd. For the idle Traueller, (I meane not
for the Souldiour) I haue knowen some that haue continued there by the
space of halfe a dozen yeare, and when they come home, they haue hyd
a little weerish leane face vnder a broad French hat, kept a terrible
coyle with the dust in the streete in their long cloakes of gray paper,
and spoke English strangely. Nought else haue they profited by their
trauell, saue learnt to distinguish of the true _Burdeaux_ Grape, and
knowe a cup of neate _Gascoygne_ wine, from wine of _Orleance _: yea and
peraduenture this also, to esteeme of the poxe as a pimple, to weare
a veluet patch on their face, and walke melancholy with their armes
folded.

From _Spaine_ what bringeth our Traueller? a scull cround hat of the
fashion of an olde deepe poringer, a diminutiue Aldermans ruffe with
shorte strings like the droppings of a mans nose, a close-bellied dublet
comming downe with a peake behinde as farre as the crupper, and cut off
before by the breast-boane like a partlet or neckercher, a wyde payre of
gascoynes which vngatherd would make a couple of womens ryding kyrtles,
huge hangers that haue halfe a Cowe hyde in them, a Rapyer that is
lineally descended from halfe a dozen Dukes at the least. Let his cloake
be as long or as short as you will: if long, it is fac'd with Turkey
grogeran raueld; if short, it hath a cape like a calues tung, and is
not so deep in his whole length, nor hath so much cloth in it I will
iustifie, as onely the standing cape of a Dutchmans cloake. I haue not
yet toucht all, for hee hath in eyther shoo as much taffaty for his
tyings, as would serue for an ancient: which serueth him (if you will
haue the mysterie of it) of the owne accord for a shoo-rag. A souldior
and a braggart he is (thats concluded) he ietteth strouting, dancing
on his toes with his hands vnder his sides. If you talke with him, hee
makes a dish-cloath of his owne Countrey in comparison of _Spaine_; but
if you vrge him more particularly wherein it exceeds, hee can giue no
instance, but in _Spaine_ they haue better bread than any we haue: when
(poore hungry slaues) they may crumble it into water wel enough and make
misons with it, for they haue not a good morsell of meate except it bee
salt pilchers to eate with it al the yere long: and which is more, they
are poore beggers, and lye in foule straw euery night.

_Italy_ the paradice of the earth, and the Epicures heauen, how doth
it forme our yong master? It makes him to kisse his hand like an ape,
cringe his neck like a starueling, and play at hey passe repasse come
aloft when hee salutes a man. From thence he brings the art of atheisme,
the art of epicurising, the art of whoring, the art of poysoning, the
art of Sodomitrie. The onely probable good thing they haue to keepe
vs from vtterly condemning it, is, that it maketh a man an excellent
Courtier, a curious carpet knight; which is by interpretation, a fine
close leacher, a glorious hypocrite. It is now a priuie note amongst the
better sort of men, when they would set a singular marke or brand on a
notorious villaine, to say, he hath been in _Italy_.

With the Dane and the Dutchman I will not encounter, for they are simple
honest men, that with _Danaus_ daughters do nothing but fill bottomles
tubs, & wil be drunk & snort in the midst of dinner: he hurts himselfe
onely that goes thether, hee cannot lightly be damnd, for the vintners,
the brewers, the malt-men and alewiues praye for him. Pitch and pay,
they will play all day: score and borrow, they will wysh him much
sorrowe. But lightly a man is nere the better for their praiers, for
they commit al deadly sinne for the most part of them in mingling their
drinke, the vintners in the highest degree.

Why iest I in such a necessary perswasiue discourse? I am a banisht
exile from my countrie, though nere linkt in consanguinitie to the best:
an Earle borne by birth, but a begger now as thou seest. These many
yeres in _Italy_ haue I liu'd an outlaw. A while I had a liberall
pension of the Pope, but that lasted not, for he continued not: one
succeeded him in his chaire, that car'd neither for Englishmen nor his
owne countrimen. Then was I driu'n to picke vp my crums amongst the
Cardinals, to implore the beneuolence & charitie of al the Dukes of
Italy whereby I haue since made a poore shift to liue, but so liue, as I
wish my selfe a thousand times dead.

_Cumpatriam amisi, tunc me periisse putato_. When I was banisht, thinke
I caught my bane.

The sea is the natiue soyle to fishes, take fishes from the sea, they
take no ioy nor thriue, but perish straight. So likewise the birds
remoued from the aire (the abode wherto they were borne) the beasts from
the earth, and I from _England_. Can a lambe take delight to be suckled
at the brests of a she-wolfe? I am a lambe nourisht with the milke of
wolues, one that with the Ethiopians inhabiting ouer against _Meroe_,
feede on nothing but scorpions: vse is another nature, yet ten times
more contentiue, were nature restored to her kingdome from whence shee
is excluded. Beleeue mee, no aire, no bread, no fire, no water agree
with a man, or dooth him anye good out of his owne countrey. Colde
frutes neuer prosper in a hot soile, nor hot in a cold. Let no man for
any transitorie pleasure sell away the inheritance of breathing he hath
in the place where he was born. Get thee home my yong lad, lay thy bones
peaceably in the sepulcher of thy fathers, waxe old in ouerlooking thy
grounds, bee at hand to close the eyes of thy kinred. The diuell and I
am desperate, he of being restored to heauen, I of being recalled home.

Here he held his peace and wept. I glad of any opportunitie of a full
poynt to part from him, told him I tooke his counsaile in worth, what
laye in mee to requite in loue should not bee lacking. Some businesse
that concerned mee highly cald mee away verie hastely, but another time
I hop'd wee should meete. Verie hardly he let me goe, but I earnestly
ouerpleading my occasions, at length he dismist mee, told mee where his
lodging was, and charged mee to visite him without excuse very often.

Heeres a stirre thought I to my selfe after I was set at libertie, that
is worse than an vpbrayding lesson after a britching: certainly if I had
bethought mee like a rascall as I was, hee should haue had an auemarie
of mee for his cynicke exhortation. God plagud mee for deriding such a
graue fatherly aduertiser. List the worst throw of ill luckes.

Tracing vp and downe the City to seeke my Curtizan till the euening
began to growe well in age, it fortuned, the Element as if it had dronke
too much in the afternoone, powrde downe so profoundly, that I was forst
to creepe like one afraid of the Watch close vnder the pentises, where
the cellar doore of a Jewes house called _Zadoch_ (ouer which in my
direct waye I did passe) beeing vnbard on the inside, ouer head and
eares I fell into it as a man falls in a ship from the oreloope into the
holde: or as in an earthquake the ground should open, and a blinde man
come feeling pad pad ouer the open Gulph with his staffe, should stumble
on sodaine into hell. Hauing worne out the anguish of my fall a little
with wallowing vp and downe, I cast vp myne eyes to see vnder what
Continent I was: and loe, (O destenie) I sawe my Curtizane kissing verie
louingly with a prentise. My backe and my sides I had hurt with my fall,
but now my head sweld & akt worse than both. I was euen gathering winde
to come vpon her with a full blast of contumely, when the Jewe (awakde
with the noyse of my fall) came bustling downe the staires, and raysing
his other semants, attached both the Curtizane and mee for breaking his
house, and conspiring with his prentise to rob him.

It was then the lawe in _Rome_, that if anie man had a fellon falne into
his hands, eyther by breaking into his house, or robbing him by the high
way, hee might choose whether he would make him his bondman, or hang
him. _Zadoch_ (as all Jewes are couetous) casting with himselfe hee
should haue no benefite by casting mee off the ladder, had another
policie in his head: hee went to one Doctour _Zacharie_ the popes
phisition, that was a Jewe and his Countreyman likewise, and tolde him
hee had the finest bargaine for him that might bee. It is not concealed
from mee (sayth he) that the time of your accustomed yearely Anatomie
is at hand, which it behooues you vnder forfeiture of the foundation of
your Colledge verie carefully to prouide for. The infection is great,
and hardly will you get a sound bodie to deale vpon: you are my
Countreyman, therefore I come to you first. Bee it knowen vnto you,
I haue a young man at home falne to me for my bondman, of the age of
eighteene, of stature tall, streight limm'd, of as cleere a complection
as anie painters fancie can imagine: goe too, you are an honest man, and
one of the scattered Children of _Abraham_ you shall haue him for fiue
hundred crownes. Let mee see him quoth Doctour _Zacharie_, and I
will giue you as much as another. Home hee sent for mee, pinniond and
shackeld I was transported alongst the streete: where passing vnder
_Iulianaes_ the Marques of _Mantuaes_ wiues window, that was a lustie
_Bona Roba_ one of the popes concubines, as she had her casement halfe
open, she lookt out and spide me. At the first sight she was enamored
with my age and beardles face, that had in it no ill signe of
phisiognomie fatall to fetters: after me shee sent to know what I was,
wherein I had offended, and whether I was going? My conducts
resolued them all. She hauing receiued this answere, with a lustfull
collachrimation lamenting my Jewish Premunire, that bodie and goods I
should lyght into the hands of such a cursed generation, inuented the
meanes of my release.

But first Ile tel you what betided me after I was brought to Doctour
_Zacharies_.

The purblinde Doctour put on his spectacles and lookt vppon mee: and
when he had throughly viewd my face, he caused mee to bee stript
naked, to feele and grope whether each lim were sound, and my skin
not infected. Then hee pierst my arme to see how my bloud ranne: which
assayes and searchings ended, he gaue _Zadoch_ hys full price and sent
him away, then lockt mee vp in a darke chamber till the day of anatomie.

O the cold sweating cares which I conceiued after I knew I should be cut
like a French summer dublet. Me thought already the bloud began to
gush out at my nose: if a flea on the arme had but bit me, I deemed the
instrument had prickt me. Well, well, I maye scofle at a shrowde turne,
but theres no such readye waye to make a man a true Christian, as to
perswade himselfe he is taken vp for an anatomie. Ile depose I praid
then more than I did in seauen yeare before. Not a drop of sweate
trickeled downe my breast and my sides, but I dreamd it was a smooth
edgde razor tenderly slicing down my breast and my sides. If any knockt
at doore.

I supposed it was the beadle of Surgeons Hall come for mee. In the night
I dreamd of nothing but Phlebotomie, bloudy fluxes, incamatiues, running
vlcers. I durst not let out a wheale for feare through it I should bleed
to death. For meate in this distance I had plum-porredge of purgations
ministred mee one after another to clarifie my bloud, that it should
not lye doddered in the flesh. Nor did he it so much for clarifying
phisicke, as to saue charges. Miserable is that mouse that liues in a
Phisitions house, _Tantalus_ liues not so hunger-starud in hell, as shee
doth there. Not the very crams that fall from his table, but Zachary
sweepes together, and of them mouldes vp a Manna. Of the ashie parings
of his bread, he would make conserue of chippings. Out of boanes after
the meate was eaten off, hee would alchumize an oyle, that he sold for a
shilling a dramme. His snot and spittle a hundred tymes he hath put
ouer to hys Apothecarie for snowe water. Any Spider he would temper to
perfect Mithridate. His rheumatique eyes when he went in the winde,
or rose early in a morning, dropt as coole allom water as you would
request. He was dame Niggardize sole heyre and executor.

A number of olde bookes had he eaten with the moathes and wormes, now
all daye would not hee studye a dodkin, but picke those wormes and
moathes out of his Librarie, and of their mixture make a preseruatiue
against the plague. The licour out of his shooes he would wring to make
a sacred balsamum against barrennes. Spare we him a line or two, &
looke backe to _Iuliana_, who conflicted in hir thoughts about me verie
debatefully, aduentured to send a messenger to Doctour _Zacharie_ in her
name, verie boldly to beg me of him, and if shee might not beg me,
to buy me with what summes of monie soeuer he would aske. _Zacharie_
iewishly and churlishly withstood both her sutes, and sayde if there
were no more Christians on the earth, he would thrust his incision knife
into his throate-boule immediatly. Which replie she taking at his hands
most despitefully, thought to crosse him ouer the shins with as sore
an ouertwhart blow yet ere a moneth to an end. The pope (I knowe not
whether at her intreatie or no) within two dayes after fell sicke,
Doctor _Zacharie_ was sent for to minister vnto him, who seeing a little
danger in his water, gaue him a gentle confortatiue for the stomack, and
desired those neere about him to perswade his holynes to take some rest,
and hee doubted not but he would be forthwith well. Who should receiue
this mild phisicke of him but the concubine _Iuliana_ his vtter enimie,
shee beeing not vnprouided of strong poison at that instant, in the
popes outward chamber so mingled it, that when his grande sublimitie
taster came to relish it, he sunke downe starke dead on the pauement.
Herewith the pope cald _Iuliana_, and askt her what strong concocted
broth she had brought him. She kneeled downe on her knees, and sayd it
was such as _Zacliarie_ the Jew had deliuered her with his owne hands,
and therefore if it misliked his holines she craued pardon. The Pope
without further sifting into the matter, woulde haue had _Zacharie_ and
all Jewes in Rome put to death, but shee hung about his knees, & with
crocodile teares desired him the sentence might bee lenified, and they
bee all but banisht at most. For doctor _Zacliary_ quoth she, your ten
times vngrateful phisition, since notwithstanding his trecherous intent,
he hath much art, and many soueraigne simples, oiles, gargarismes and
sirups in his closet and house that may stand your mightines in stead,
I begge all his goods onely for your beatitudes preseruation and good.
This request at the first was seald with a kisse, and the popes edict
without delaye proclaimed throughout Rome, namely, that all foreskinne
clippers whether male or female belonging to the old Jurie, should
depart and auoyde vpon payne of hanging within twentie dayes after the
date thereof.

_Iuliana_ two dayes before the proclamation came out, sent her seruants
to extend vppon _Zacharies_ territories, his goods, his mooueables, his
chattels and his seruants: who perfourmed their commission to the vtmost
title, and left him not so much as master of an vrinall case or a candle
boxe. It was about sixe a clocke in the euening, when those boot-halers
entred: into my chamber they rusht, when I sate leaning on my elbow, and
my left hand vnder my side, deuising what a kinde of death it might be
to be let bloud till a man dye. I cald to minde the assertion of some
Philosophers, who said the soule was nothing but bloud: then thought I,
what a filthie thing were this, if I should let my soule fall and breake
his necke into a bason. I had but a pimple rose with heate in that part
of the veyne where they vse to pricke, and I fearfully misdeemed it was
my soule searching for passage. Fie vppon it, a mans breath to bee let
out a backe-doore, what a villanie it is? To dye bleeding is all one as
if a man should dye pissing. Good drink makes good bloud, so that pisse
is nothing but bloud vnder age. _Seneca_ and _Lucan_ were lobcockes to
choose that death of all other: a pigge or a hogge or anie edible brute
beast a cooke or a butcher deales vpon, dyes bleeding. To dye with a
pricke, wherewith the faintest hearted woman vnder heauen would not be
kild, O God it is infamous.

In this meditation did they seaze vpon mee, in my cloake they muffeld
mee that no man might knowe mee, nor I see which waye I was carried.
The first ground I toucht after I was out of _Zacharies_ house, was
the Countesse _Iulianaes_ chamber: little did I surmise that fortune
reserued mee to so faire a death. I made no other reckoning all the
while they had mee on their shoulders, but that I was on horse-backe to
heauen, and carried to Church on a beere, excluded for euer for drinking
anie more ale or beere. _Iuliana_ scornfully questiond them thus (as if
I had falne into her hands beyond expectation), what proper apple-squire
is this you bring so suspitiously into my chamber? what hath he done?
where had you him? They aunswered likewise a farre of, that in one
of _Zacharies_ chambers they found him close prisoner, and thought
themselues guiltie of the breach of her Ladiships commaundement if
they should haue left him behinde. O quoth she, ye loue to bee double
diligent, or thought peraduenture that I being a lone woman stood in
neede of a loue. Bring you me a princockes beardlesse boy (I knowe not
whence hee is, nor whether he would) to call my name in suspense? I tell
you, you haue abused me, and I can hardly brook it at your hands. You
should haue lead him to the Magistrate, no commission receiued you of
me but for his goods and his seruants. They besought her to excuse their
ouerweening errour, it proceeded from a zealous care of their duetie,
and no negligent default But why should not I coniecture the worst quoth
she? I tell you troth, I am halfe in a iealozie hee is some fantasticall
amorous yonckster, who to dishonor me hath hyr'd you to this stratagem.
It is a likely matter that such a man as _Zacharie_ should make a prison
of his house, and deale in matters of state. By your leaue sir gallant,
vnder locke and key shal you stay with me, till I haue enquirde further
of you, you shall be sifted thoroughly ere you and I part Goe maide shew
him to the further chamber at the ende of the gallerie that lookes into
the garden: you my trim pandars I pray garde him thether as you tooke
paines to bring him hether. When you haue so done, see the dores be made
fast, and come your way. Heere was a wily wench had her liripoop without
book, she was not to seeke in her knackes and shifts: such are all
women, not one of them but hath a cloak for the raine, and can bleare
her husbands eyes as she list. Not too much of this madam Marques at
once: wele step a little backe, and dilate what _Zadoch_ the Jew did
with my curtizan, after he had sold me to _Zacharie_. Of an ill tree I
hope you are not so ill sighted in grafting to expect good frute: he was
a Jew, & intreated her like a Jew. Under shadow of enforcing her to tell
how much money she had of his prentice so to bee trayned to his cellar,
hee stript her, and scourgd her from top to toe tantara. Day by day
hee disgested his meate with leading her the measures. A diamond
Delphinicall drye leachour it was.

The ballet of the whipper of late dayes here in England, was but a
scoffe in comparison of him. All the colliers of Romford, who hold
their corporation by yarking the blind beare at Paris garden, were but
bunglers to him, he had the right agility of the lash, there were none
of them could made the cord come aloft with a twange halfe like him.
Marke the ending, marke the ending. The tribe of Juda is adiudged
from Rome to bee trudging, they may no longer be lodged there, all
the Albumazers, Rabisacks, Gedeons, Tebiths, Benhadads, Benrodans,
Zedechiahs, Halies of them were banquerouts and turnd out of house
and home. _Zacharie_ came running to _Zadochs_ in sack cloth and ashes
presently after his goods were confiscated and tolde him how he was
serued, and what decree was comming out against them all. Descriptions
stand by, heere is to be expressed the furie of Lucifer when he was
turnd ouer heauen barre for a wrangler. There is a toad fish, which
taken out of the water swels more than one would thinke his skin could
holde, and bursts in his face that toucheth him. So swelled _Zadoch_,
and was readie to burst out of his skinne, and shoote his bowels like
chaine-shot full at _Zacharies_ face for bringing him such balefull
tidings, his eies glared and burnt bliewe like brimstone and _aqua vito_
set on fire in an egshell, his verie nose lightned glow-wormes, his
teeth crasht and grated together, like the ioynts of a high building
cracking and rocking like a cradle, when as a tempest takes her full but
against his broad side. He swore, he curst, and said, these be they
that worshippe that crucifide God of Nazareth, heres the fruits of their
newfound gospell, sulphur and gunpouder carry them all quick to Gehenna.
I would spend my soule willingly, to haue this triple headed Pope with
all his sin-absolued whores, and oile-greased priests borne with a
blacke sant on the deuills backes in procession to the pit of perdition.
Would I might sinke presently into ye earth, so I might blow vp this
Rome, this whore of _Babylon_ into the aire with my breath. If I must
be banisht, if those heathen dogs will needes rob me of my goods, I wyll
poyson their springs and conduit heades, whence they receiue all their
water round about the citie, He tice all the yong children into my house
that I can get, and cutting their throates barrell them vp in poudring
beefe tubbes, and so send them to victuall the popes galleyes. Ere
the officers come to extend, Ile bestowe a hundred pound on a doale of
bread, which Ile cause to bee kneaded with Scorpions oy le that may
kill more than the plague. Ile hire them that make their wafers or
sacramentarie gods to minge them after the same sort, so in the zeale
of their superstitious religion, shall they languish and droup like
carrion. If there be euer a blasphemous coniurer, that can call the
windes from their brazen caues, and make the cloudes trauell before
their time, Ile giue him the other hundred pounds to disturbe the
heauens a whole weeke together with thunder and lightning, if it bee for
nothing but to sowre all the wines in _Rome_, and turne them to vinegar.
As long as they haue either oyle or wine, this plague feedes but
pinglingly vpon them.

_Zadoch, Zadoch_ said Doctor _Zacharie_, (cutting him off) thou
threatenest the aire, whiles wee perish heere on earth. It is the
Countesse _Iuliana_ the Marquesse of _Mantuaes_ wife and no other, that
hath complotted our confusion. Aske not how, but insist in my words, and
assist in reuenge.

As how, as how, said _Zadoch_, shrugging and shrubbing. More happie than
the Patriarches were I, if crusht to death with the greatest torments
_Romes_ tyrants haue tride, there might be quintessenst out of me one
quart of precious poyson. I haue a leg with an issue, shall I cut it
off, and from his fount of corruption extract a venome worse than anie
serpents? If thou wilt, Ile goe to a house that is infected, where
catching the plague, and hauing got a running sore vpon me, Ile come
and deliuer her a supplication, and breathe vpon her. I know my breath
stinkes so alreadie, that it is within halfe a degree of poyson. Ile pay
her home if I perfect it with any more putrifaction.

No, no brother _Zadoch_ answered _Zacharie_, that is not the way.
Canst thou prouide mee ere a bondmaide, indued with singular & diuine
qualified beautie, whome as a present from our synagogue thou maist
commend vnto her, desiring her to be good and gracious vnto vs.

I haue, I am for you quoth _Zadoch_: _Diamante_ come forth. Heeres a
wench (said he) of as cleare a skin as _Susanna_, shee hath not a wemme
on her flesh from the soale of the foote to the crowne of the head: how
thinke you master doctor, will shee not serue the turne?

She will, said _Zacharie_: and therefore Ile tell you what charge I
would haue committed to her. But I care not if I disclose it onely to
her. Maid, (if thou beest a maid) come hether to mee, thou must be sent
to the countesse of _Mantuaes_ about a small peece of seruice, whereby
being now a bond woman thou shalt purchase freedome, and gaine a large
dowrie to thy marriage. I know thy master loues thee derely though hee
will not let thee perceiue so much, hee intends after hee is dead to
make thee his heire, for he hath no children: please him in that I shall
instruct thee, and thou art made for euer. So it is, that the pope is
farre out of liking with the countesse of _Mantua_ his concubine,
and hath put his trust in me his phisition to haue her quietly and
charitably made away. Now I cannot intend it, for I haue manie cures in
hand which call vpon me hourely: thou if thou beest plac'd with her as
her waiting maid or cup-bearer, maist temper poyson with her broth, her
meate, her drinke, her oyles, her sirrups, and neuer bee bewraid. I will
not say whether the pope hath heard of thee, and thou maist come to bee
his lemman in her place, if thou behaue thy selfe wisely. What, hast
thou the heart to go thorough with it or no? _Diamante_ deliberating
with her selfe in what hellish seruitude she liu'd with the Jew, and
that she had no likelihood to be releast of it, but fall from euill to
worse if she omitted this opportunitie, resigned her selfe ouer wholly
to be disposed and emploid as seemed best vnto them. Therevpon, without
further consultation, her wardrop was richly rigd, her tongue smooth
fil'd & new edg'd on the whetstone, her drugs deliuerd her, and
presented she was by _Zadoch_ her master to the countesse, together with
some other slight new-fangles, as from the whole congregation, desiring
her to stand their merciful mistresse, and sollicite the Pope for them,
that through one mans ignorant offence were all generally in disgrace
with him, and had incurred the cruell sentence of losse of goods and of
banishment.

_Iuliana_ liking wel the pretie round face of my black browe _Diamante_,
gaue the Jew better countenance than otherwise she would haue done,
and told him for her owne part shee was but a priuate woman, and could
promise nothing confidently of his holines: for though he had suffred
himselfe to bee ouerruled by her in some humors, yet in this that tutcht
him so nerely, she knew not how he would be enclind: but what lay in her
either to pacifie or perswade him they should be sure of, and so crau'd
his absence.

His backe turnd, shee askt _Diamante_ what countrey woman she was,
what frends she had, and how shee fell into the hands of that Jew? She
answered, that she was a _Magnificoes_ daughter of _Venice_, stolne when
she was yong from her frends, and sold to this Jew for a bondwoman, who
(quoth she) hath vsde me so iewishly and tyrannously, that for euer I
must celebrate the memorie of this day, wherein I am deliuered from his
Jurisdiction. Alas (quoth she deep sighing) why did I enter into anie
mention of my owne misusage? It will be thought that that which I am now
to reueale, proceeds of mallice not truth. Madam, your life is sought by
these Jewes that sue to you. Blush not, nor be troubled in your minde,
for with warning I shall arme you against all their intentions. Thus
and thus (quoth she) said doctor _Zacharie_ vnto me, this poyson he
deliuered me. Before I was cald in to them, such and such consultation
through the creuise of the dore fast lockt did I heare betwixt them.
Denie it if they can, I will iustifie it: onely I beseech you to be
fauorable Ladie vnto me, and let me not fall againe into the hands of
those vipers.

_Iuliana_ said little but thought vnhappely, onely she thankt her for
detecting it, and vowed though she were her bond woman to be a mother
vnto her. The poyson she tooke of her, and set it vp charily on a shelfe
in her closet, thinking to keepe it for some good purposes: as for
example, when I was consumed and worne to the bones through her abuse,
she would giue me but a dram too much, and pop mee into a priuie. So
shee had seru'd some of her paramours ere that, and if God had not sent
_Diamante_ to be my redeemer, vndoubtedly I had drunke of the same cup.

In a leafe or two before was I lockt vp: heere in this page the foresaid
goodwife Countesse comes to me, shee is no longer a iudge but a client.
How she came, in what manner of attyre, with what immodest and vncomely
words shee courted me, if I should take vpon me to enlarge, all modest
eares would abhorre me. Some inconuenience she brought me too by her
harlot-like behauiour, of which inough I can neuer repent me.

Let that bee forgiu'n and forgotten, fleshly delights could not make her
slothfull or slumbring in reuenge against _Zadoch_. Shee set men about
him to incense and egge him on in courses of discontentment, and
other supervising espialls, to plye followe and spurre for-warde those
suborning incensers. Both which playd their parts so, that _Zadoch_ of
his own nature violent, swore by the arke of _Iehoua_ to set the whole
citie on fire ere he went out of it. _Zacharie_ after he had furnisht
the wench with the poyson, and giu'n her instructions to goe to the
diuell, durst not staye one houre for feare of disclosing, but fled to
the Duke of _Burbon_ that after sackt Rome, & there practised with his
bastardship all the mischief against the pope and _Rome_ that enuie
could put into his minde. _Zadoch_ was left behinde for the hangman.
According to his oath, he prouided balls of wilde fire in a readines,
and laid traines of gunpouder in a hundred seuerall places of the citie
to blow it vp, which hee had set fire too, as also bandied his balls
abroad, if his attendant spies had not taken him with ye manner. To the
straightest prison in _Rome_ he was dragged, where from top to toe he
was clogd with fetters and manacles. _Iuliana_ informed the pope of
_Zacharies_ and his practise, _Zachary_ was sought for, but _non est
inuentus_, he was packing long before. Commaundement was giu'n, that
_Zadoch_ whom they had vnder hand and seale of locke and key, should be
executed with all the fiery torments that could be found out.

He make short worke, for I am sure I haue wearied all my readers. To the
execution place was he brought, where first and formost he was stript,
then on a sharpe yron stake fastened in the ground, had he his fundament
pitcht, which stake ran vp along into his bodie like a spit, vnder his
arme-hoales two of like sort, a great bonfire they made round about him,
wherewith his flesh rosted not burnd: and euer as with the heate his
skinne blistered, the fire was drawne aside, and they basted him with
a mixture of Aqua fortis, allam water, and Mercury sublimatum, which
smarted to the very soule of him, and searcht him to the marrowe. Then
did they scourge hys backe parts so blistered and basted, with burning
whips of red hot wire: his head they noynted ouer with pitch and
tarre, and so enflamed it. To his priuie members they tied streaming
fierworkes, the skinne from the crest of his shoulder, as also from his
elbowes, his huckle bones, his knees, his ankles they pluckt and gnawd
off with sparkling pincers: hys breast and his belly with seale skins
they grated ouer, which as fast as they grated & rawed, one stoode ouer
and lau'd with smithes cindry water and _aqua vito_: his nayles they
halfe raised vp, and then vnderpropt them with Sharpe prickes like a
taylers shop windowe halfe open on a holiday: euerie one of his fingers
they rent vp to the wrist: his toes they brake off by the rootes, and
let them still hang by a little skinne. In conclusion, they had a small
oyle fire, such as men blow light bubbles of glasse with, and beginning
at his feet, they let him lingringly burne vp limme by limme, till his
hart was consumed, and then he died. Triumph women, this was the end
of the whipping Jew, contriued by a woman, in reuenge of two women, her
selfe and her maid.

I haue told you or should tell you in what credit _Diamante_ grew with
her mistres. _Iuliana_ neuer dreamed but she was an authenticall maide:
she made her the chiefe of her bed chamber, she appointed none but her
to looke into me, and serue me of such necessaries as I lacked. You must
suppose when wee met there was no small reioycing on either part, much
like the three Brothers that went three seuerall wayes to seeke their
fortunes, and at the yeres end at those three crosse waies met againe,
and told one another how they sped: so after we had been long asunder
seeking our fortunes, wee commented one to another most kindly, what
crosse haps had encountred vs. Nere a six houres but the Countesse cloyd
mee with her companie. It grew to this passe, that either I must finde
out some miraculous meanes of escape, or drop away in a consumption, as
one pin'd for lacke of meate: I was cleane spent and done, there was no
hope of me.

The yere held on his course to domes day, when Saint _Peters_ day
dawned. That day is a day of supreme solemnitie in _Rome_, when the
Embassador of _Spaine_ comes and presents a milke white iennet to the
pope, that kneeles downe vppon his owne accord in token of obeisaunce
and humilitie before him, and lets him stride on his backe as easie as
one strides ouer a blocke: with this iennet is offered a rich purse of
a yard length, full of Peter-pence. No musique that hath the gift of
vtterance, but sounds all the while: coapes and costly vestments decke
the hoarsest and beggerliest singing man, not a clarke or sexten is
absent, no nor a mule nor a foote-cloth belonging to anie cardinall, but
attends on the taile of the triumph. The pope himselfe is borne in his
pontificalibus thorough the _Burgo_ (which is the cheefe streete in
_Rome_) to the Embassadors house to dinner, and thether resorts all the
assembly: where if a Poet should spend all his life time in describing a
banquet, he could not feast his auditors halfe so wel with words, as he
doth his guests with iunkets.

To this feast _Iuliana_ addressed her selfe like an Angell: in a littour
of greene needle-worke wrought like an arbor, and open on euerie side
was she borne by foure men, hidden vnder cloth rough plushed and wouen
like eglantine and wood-bine. At the foure corners it was topt with
foure round christall cages of Nightingales. For foote men, on either
side of her went foure virgins clad in lawne, with lutes in their hands
playing. Next before her two and two in order, a hundred pages in sutes
of white cipresse, and long horsemens coates of cloth of siluer: who
being all in white, aduanced euery one of them her picture, enclosed
in a white round screene of feathers, such as is carried ouer great
Princesses heads when they ride in summer, to keepe them from the heate
of the sun. Before the went a foure-score bead women she maintaind in
greene gownes, scattring strowing hearbs and floures, After her followed
the blinde, the halt and the lame sumptuously apparailed like Lords: and
thus past she on to Saint _Peters_.

_Interea quid agitur donti_, how ist at home all this while. My curtizan
is left my keeper, the keyes are committed vnto her, she is mistres _fac
totunt_. Against our countesse we conspire, packe vp all her iewels,
plate, money that was extant, and to the water side send them: to
conclude, couragiously rob her, and run away. _Quid non auri sacra
fames_? What defame will not golde salue. Hee mistooke himselfe that
inuented the prouerbe, _Dimicandum est pro aris & fama_: for it should
haue been _pro auro & fama_: not for altares and fires we must contend,
but for gold and fame.

Oares nor winde could not stirre nor blow faster, than we toyld out of
_Tiber_; a number of good fellowes would giue size ace and the dice that
with as little toyle they could leaue Tyburne behinde them. Out of ken
we were ere the Countesse came from the feast When she returned and
found her house not so much pestred as it was wont, her chests her
closets and her cupbords broke open to take aire, and that both I and my
keeper was missing: O then shee fared like a franticke Bacchinall, she
stampt, she star'd, shee beate her head against the walls, scratcht her
face, bit her fingers, and strewd all the chamber with her haire.
None of her seuants durst stay in her sight, but she beate them out
in heapes, and bad them goe seeke search they knew not where, and hang
themselues, and neuer looke her in the face more, if they did not hunt
vs out. After her furie had reasonably spent it selfe, her breast began
to swell with the mother, caused by her former fretting & chafing, and
she grew verie ill at ease. Whereuppon shee knockt for one of her maids,
and had her run into her closet, and fetch her a little glasse that
stood on the vpper shelfe, wherein there was _spiritus vini_. The maid
went, & mistaking tooke the glasse of poyson which _Diamante_ had giu'n
her, and she kept in store for me. Comming with it as fast as her legs
could carrie her, her mistres at her returne was in a swound, and lay
for dead on the floore, wherat she shrikt out, and fel a rubbing &
chafing her very busily. When that would not serue, she tooke a keye and
opened her mouth, and hauing heard that _spiritus vini_ was a thing of
mightie operation, able to call a man from death to life, shee tooke the
poyson, and verely thinking it to be _spiritus vini_ (such as she was
sent for) powrd a large quantitie of it into her throate, and iogd on
her backe to disgest it. It reuiu'd her with a merrie vengeance, for it
kilde her outright: only she awakend and lift vp her hands, but spake
nere a word. Then was the maid in her grandames beanes, and knew not
what should become of her: I heard the Pope tooke pitie on her, and
because her trespasse was not voluntary but chancemedly, he assigned her
no other punishment but this, to drinke out the rest of the poyson in
the glasse that was left, and so goe scot-free. We carelesse of these
mischances, helde on our flight, and saw no man come after vs but we
thought had pursued vs. A theefe they say mistakes euerie bush for a
true man, thewinde ratled not in anie bush by the way as I rode, but I
straight drew my rapier. To _Bolognia_ with a merrie gale wee posted,
where wee lodged our selues in a blinde streete out of the way, and kept
secret manie dayes: but when we perceiued we saild in the hauen, that
the winde was layd, and no alarum made after vs, we boldly came abroad:
& one day hearing of a more desperat murdrer than _Cayn_ that was to
be executed, we followed the multitude, and grutcht not to lend him our
eyes at his last parting.

Who should it bee but one _Cutwolfe_, a wearish dwarfish writhen fac'd
cobler, brother to _Bartoll_ the Italian, that was confederate with
_Esdras_ of _Granado_, and at that time stole away my curtizan, when he
rauisht _Heraclide_.

It is not so naturall for me to epitomize his impietie, as to heare him
in his owne person speake vppon the wheele where he was to suffer.

Prepare your eares and your teares, for neuer till this thrust I anie
tragicall matter vpon you. Strange and wonderfull are Gods iudgements,
heere shine they in their glory. Chast _Heraclide_ thy bloud is laid
vp in heauens treasurie, not one drop of it was lost, but lent out to
vsurie: water powred forth sinkes downe quietly into the earth, but
bloud spilt on the ground sprinkles vp to the firmament. Murder is
wide-mouthd, and will not let God rest till he grant reuenge. Not onely
the bloud of the slaughtred innocent but the soule ascendeth to his
throne, and there cries out & exclaimes for iustice and recompence.
Guiltles soules that liue euerie houre subiect to violence, and with
your despairing feares doo much empaire Gods prouidence: fasten your
eyes on this spectacle that will adde to your faith. Referre all your
oppressions afflictions and iniuries to the euen ballanced eye of the
Almightie, hee it is, that when your patience sleepeth, will bee most
exceeding mindfull of you.

This is but a glose vpon the text: thus _Cutwolfe_ begins his insulting
oration.

Men and people that haue made holy-daie to behold my pained flesh toile
on the wheele. Expect not of me a whining penitent slaue, that shal do
nothing but crie and saie his praiers, and so be crusht in peeces. My
bodie is little, but my minde is as great as a Giants: the soule which
is in mee, is the verie soul of _Iulius Cosar_ by reuersion. My name is
_Cutwolfe_, neither better nor worse by occupation, than a poore cobler
of _Verona_, coblers are men and kings are no more. The occasion of my
comming hether at this present, is to haue a fewe of my bones broken
(as we are all borne to die) for being the death of the Emperour of
homicides _Esdras of Granado_. About two yeares since in the streetes
of _Rome_ he slew the onely and eldest brother I had named _Bartoll_, in
quarrelling about a curtizan. The newes brought to me as I was sitting
in my shop vnder a stall knocking in of tackes, I think I raisd vp my
bristles, solde pritchaule, spunge, blacking tub, and punching yron,
bought mee rapier and pistoll, and to goe I went. Twentie months
together I pursued him, from _Rome to Naples, from Naples to Caiete
passing ouer the riuer, from Caiete to Syenna, from Syenna to Florence,
from Florence to Parma, from Parma to Pauia, from Pauia to Syon, from
Syon to Geneua, from Geneua backe againe towards Rome_: where in the way
it was my chance to meet him in the nicke here at _Bolognia_, as I will
tell you how. I saw a great fray in the streetes as I past along, and
manie swords walking, wherevpon drawing neerer, and enquiring who they
were, answer was returned mee it was that notable Bandetto _Esdras of
Granado_. O so I was tickled in the spleene with that word, my heart
hopt & daunst, my elbowes itcht, my fingers friskt, I wist not what
should become of my feete, nor knew what I did for ioy. The fray parted.
I thought it not conuenient to single him out (being a sturdie knaue)
in the street, but to stay till I had got him at more aduantage. To
his lodging I dogd him, lay at the dore all night where hee entred, for
feare hee should giue me the slip anie way. Betimes in the morning I
rung the bell and crau'd to speake with him: vp to his chamber dore I
was brought, where knocking, hee rose in his shirt and let me in, and
when I was entred, bad me lock the dore and declare my arrant, and so he
slipt to bed againe.

Marrie this quoth I is my arrant Thy name is _Esdras of Granado_, is it
not? Most treacherously thou slewst my brother _Bartoll_ about two yeres
agoe in the streetes of _Rome_: his death am I come to reuenge. In quest
of thee euer since aboue three thousand miles haue I trauaild. I haue
begd to maintaine me the better part of the waye, onely because I would
intermit no time from my pursute in going backe for monie. Now haue
I got thee naked in my power, die thou shalt, though my mother and my
grandmother dying did intreate for thee. I haue promist the diuell thy
soule within this houre, breake my word I will not, in thy breast I
intend to burie a bullet. Stirre not, quinch not, make no noyse: for if
thou dost it will be worse for thee. Quoth _Esdras_, what euer thou bee
at whose mercie I lye, spare me, and I wil giue thee as much gold as
thou wilt aske. Put me to anie paines my life reserued, and I willingly
will sustaine them: cut off my armes and legs, and leaue me as a lazer
to some loathsome spittle, where I may but liue a yeare to pray and
repent me. For thy brothers death the despayre of minde that hath euer
since haunted mee, the guiltie gnawing worme of conscience I feele
may bee sufficient penaunce. Thou canst not send me to such a hell, as
alreadie there is in my hart. To dispatch me presently is no reuenge,
it wil soone be forgotten: let me dye a lingring death, it will be
remembred a great deale longer. A lingring death maye auaile my soule,
but it is the illest of ills that can befortune my bodie. For my soules
health I beg my bodies torment: bee not thou a diuell to torment my
soule, and send me to eternall damnation. Thy ouer-hanging sword
hides heauen from my sight, I dare not looke vp, least I embrace my
deaths-wound vnawares: I cannot pray to God, and plead to thee both
at once. Ay mee, alreadie I see my life buried in the wrinckles of thy
browes: say but I shall liue, though thou meanest to kill me. Nothing
confounds like to suddaine terror, it thrusts euerie sense out of
office. Poyson wrapt vp in sugred pills is but halfe a poyson: the feare
of deaths lookes are more terrible than his stroake. The whilest I viewe
death, my faith is deaded: where a mans feare is, there his heart is.
Feare neuer engenders hope: how can I hope that heauens father will saue
mee from the hell euerlasting, when he giues me ouer to the hell of thy
furie.

_Heraclide_, now thinke I on thy teares sowen in the dust (thy teares,
that my bloudie minde made barraine). In reuenge of thee, God hardens
this mans heart against mee: yet I did not slaughter thee, though
hundreds else my hand hath brought to the shambles. Gentle sir, learne
of mee what it is to clog your conscience with murder, to haue your
dreames, your sleepes, your solitarie walkes troubled and disquieted
with murther. Your shaddowe by daye will affright you, you will not see
a weapon vnsheathd, but immediately you will imagine it is predestinate
for your destruction.

This murder is a house diuided within it selfe: it subornes a mans
owne soule to informe against him: his soule (being his accuser) brings
foorth his two eyes as witnesses agaynst him: and the least eye
witnesse is vnrefutable. Plucke out my eyes if thou wilt, and depriue
my trayterous soule of her two best witnesses. Digge out my blasphemous
tongue with thy dagger, both tongue and eyes will I gladly forgoe, to
haue a little more time to thinke on my iourney to heauen.

Deferre a while thy resolution. I am not at peace with the world,
for euen but yesterdaye I fought, and in my furie threatened further
vengeaunce: had I face to face askt forgiuenesse, I should thinke
halfe my sinnes were forgiuen. A hundred Diuells haunt mee daily for my
horrible murders: the diuells when I dye will be loath to goe to hell
with mee, for they desir'd of Christ he would not send them to hell
before their time; if they goe not to hell, into thee they will goe, and
hideously vexe thee for turning them out of their habitation. Wounds I
contemne, life I prize light, it is another worlds tranquilitie which
makes me so timerous: euerlasting damnation, euerlasting howling and
lamentation. It is not from death I request thee to deliuer me, but from
this terror of torments eternitie. Thy brothers bodie onely I pierst
vnaduisedly, his soule meant I no harme too at all: my bodie & soule
both shalt thou cast awaye quite, if thou doost at this instant what
thou maist Spare me, spare me I beseech thee: by thy owne soules
saluation I desire thee, seeke not my soules vtter perdition: in
destroying me, thou destroyest thy selfe and me.

Eagerly I replide after his long suppliant oration; Though I knewe God
would neuer haue mercie on mee except I had mercie on thee, yet of thee
no mercie would I haue. Reuenge in our tragedies continually is raised
from hell: of hell doo I esteeme better than heauen, if it affoord me
reuenge. There is no heauen but reuenge. I tell thee, I would not haue
vndertooke so much toyle to gaine heauen, as I haue done in pursuing
thee for reuenge. Diuine reuenge, of which (as of the ioyes aboue)
there is no fulnes or satietie. Looke how my feete are blistered
with following thee from place to place. I haue riuen my throat
withouerstraining it to curse thee. I haue grownd my teeth to pouder
with grating and grinding them together for anger, when anie hath nam'd
thee. My tongue with vaine threates is bolne, and waxen too big for
my mouth. My eies haue broken their strings with staring and looking
ghastly, as I stood deuising how to frame or set my countenance when I
met thee. I haue nere spent my strength in imaginarie acting on stone
wals, what I determined to execute on thee. Entreate not, a miracle maye
not repriue thee: villaine, thus march I with my blade into thy bowels.

Stay, stay exclaimed _Esdras_, and heare mee but one word further.
Though neither for God nor man thou carest, but placeth thy whole
felicitie in murder, yet of thy felicitie learne how to make a greater
felicitie. Respite me a little from thy swords poynt, and set mee
about some execrable enterprise, that may subuert the whole state of
Christendome, and make all mens eares tingle that heare of it. Commaund
me to cut all my kindreds throates, to burne men women and children in
their beds in millions, by firing their Cities at midnight. Be it Pope,
Emperour or Turke that displeaseth thee, he shal not breath on the
earth. For thy sake will I sweare and forsweare, renounce my baptisme,
and all the interest I haue in any other sacrament. Onely let me liue
how miserable soeuer, be it in a dungeon amongst toades, serpents and
adders, or set vp to the necke in dung. No paines I will refuse how euer
proroged, to haue a little respite to purifie my spirit: oh heare me,
heare me, and thou canst not be hardned against me.

At this his importunitie paused a little, not as retyring from my
wreakful resolution, but going back to gather more forces of vengeance.
With my selfe I deuised how to plague him double for his base minde.
My thoughts traueld in quest of some notable newe Italionisme, whose
murdrous platforme might not onely extend on his bodie, but his soule
also. The ground worke of it was this. That whereas he had promised for
my sake to sweare and forsweare, and commit _Iulian_-like violence on
the highest seales of religion: if he would but thus farre satisfie
me he should bee dismist from my furie. First and formost he should
renounce God and his lawes, and vtterly disclaime the whole title or
interest he had in anie couenaunt of saluation. Next he should curse
him to his face, as _Iob_ was willed by his wife, and write an absolute
firme obligation of his soule to the diuell, without condition or
exception. Thirdly and lastly (hauing done this), hee should praye to
God feruently neuer to haue mercie vppon him, or pardon him. Scarce
had I propounded these articles vnto him, but he was beginning his
blasphemous abiurations. I wonder the earth opened not and swallowed
vs both hearing the bold tearmes he blasted forth in contempt of
Christianitie: Heauen hath thundred when halfe lesse contumelies against
it haue been vttered. Able they were to raise Saints and Martirs from
their graues, and plucke Christ himselfe from the right hand of his
father. My ioints trembled & quakt with attending them, my haire stood
vpright, & my hart was turned wholly to fire. So affectionately and
zealously did hee giue himselfe ouer to infidelitie, as if sathan had
gotten the vpper hand of our high Maker. The veyne in his left hand that
is deriued from his heart with no faint blow he pierst, & with the bloud
that flowd from it, writ a ful obligation of his soule to the diuell:
yea, more earnestly he praid vnto God neuer to forgiue it his soule,
than manie Christians doo to saue theyr soules. These fearfull
ceremonies brought to an end, I bad him ope his mouth and gape wide. He
did so (as what wil not slaues doo for feare). Therwith made I no more
adoo, but shot him ful into the throat with my pistol: no more spake he
after, so did I shoote him that hee might neuer speak after, or repent
him.

His body being dead lookd as blacke as a toad: the diuell presently
branded it for his owne. This is the fault that hath called me hether.
No true _Italian_ but will honor me for it Reuenge is the glory of
Armes, and the highest performance of valure: reuenge is whatsoeuer wee
call law or iustice. The farther we wade in reuenge, the nerer come we
to the throne of the Almightie. To his scepter it is properly ascribed,
his scepter he lends vnto man, when he lets one man scourge another.
All true _Italians_ imitate mee, in reuenging constantly, and dying
valiantly. Hangman to thy taske, for I am readie for the vtmost of
thy rigor. Herewith all the people (outragiously incensed) with
one conioyned outcrye yelled mainely, Away with him, away with him,
Executioner torture him, teare him, or we will teare thee in peeces if
thou spare him.

The executioner needed no exhortation herevnto, for of his owne nature
was he hackster good enough: olde excellent hee was at a bone-ache. At
the first chop with his wood-knife would he fish for a mans heart, and
fetch it out as easily as a plum from the bottome of a porredge pot. Hee
would cracke neckes as fast as a cooke crackes egges: a fidler cannot
turne his pin so soone, as he would turn a man of the ladder. Brauely
did hee drum on this _Cutwolfes_ bones, not breaking them outright, but
like a sadler knocking in of tackes, iarring on them quaueringly with
his hammer a great while together. No ioynt about him but with a hatchet
he had for the nonce, he disioynted halfe, and then with boyling lead
souldred vp the wounds from bleeding. His tongue he puld out, least he
should blaspheme in his torment: venomous stinging wormes hee thrust
into his eares, to keep his head rauingly occupied: with cankers
scruzed to peeces hee rubd his mouth and his gums. No lim of his but
was lingringly splinterd in shiuers. In this horror left they him on the
wheele as in hel: where yet liuing, hee might behold his flesh legacied
amongst the foules of the aire. Unsearchable is the booke of our
destenies. One murder begetteth another: was neuer yet bloud-shed
barrain from the beginning of the world to this day. Mortifiedly
abiected and danted was I with this truculent tragedie of _Cutwolfe_ and
_Esdras_. To such straight life did it thence forward incite me, that
ere I went out of _Bolognia_ I married my curtizane, performed manie
aimes deedes; and hasted so fast out of the _Sodom_ of _Italy_, that
within fortie daies I arriued at the King of _Englands_ Campe twixt
_Ardes_ and _Guines_ in _France_: where he with great triumphes met and
entertained the Emperour and the French King, and feasted manie dayes.
And so as my Storie began with the King at _Turnay_ and _Turwin_, I
thinke meete heere to end it with the King at _Ardes & Guines_. All the
conclusiue Epilogue I will make is this; that if herein I haue pleased
any, it shall animate me to more paynes in this kinde. Otherwise I will
sweare vpon an English Chronicle, neuer to bee outlandish Chronicler
more while I liue. Farewell as manie as wish me well. _Iune_ 27. 1593.

Finis.
