
CHAPTER VII.

     Now, Billy Berwick, keep good heart,
     And of they talking let me be;
     But if thou art a man, as I am sure thou art,
     Come over the dike and fight with me.

     Old Ballad.

THE Master of Ravenswood had mounted the ambling hackney which he before
rode, on finding the accident which had happened to his led horse, and,
for the animal's ease, was proceeding at a slow pace from the Tod's Den
towards his old tower of Wolf's Crag, when he heard the galloping of a
horse behind him, and, looking back, perceived that he was pursued by
young Bucklaw, who had been delayed a few minutes in the pursuit by
the irresistable temptation of giving the hostler at the Tod's Den some
recipe for treating the lame horse. This brief delay he had made up by
hard galloping, and now overtook the Master where the road traversed
a waste moor. "Halt, sir," cried Bucklaw; "I am no political agent--no
Captain Craigengelt, whose life is too important to be hazarded in
defence of his honour. I am Frank Hayston of Bucklaw, and no man injures
me by word, deed, sign, or look, but he must render me an account of
it."

"This is all very well, Mr. Hayston of Bucklaw," replied the Master
of Ravenswood, in a tone the most calm and indifferent; "but I have no
quarrel with you, and desire to have none. Our roads homeward, as well
as our roads through life, lie in different directions; there is no
occasion for us crossing each other."

"Is there not?" said Bucklaw, impetuously. "By Heaven! but I say that
there is, though: you called us intriguing adventurers."

"Be correct in your recollection, Mr. Hayston; it was to your companion
only I applied that epithet, and you know him to be no better."

"And what then? He was my companion for the time, and no man shall
insult my companion, right or wrong, while he is in my company."

"Then, Mr. Hayston," replied Ravenswood, with the same composure, "you
should choose your society better, or you are like to have much work
in your capacity of their champion. Go home, sir; sleep, and have more
reason in your wrath to-morrow."

"Not so, Master, you have mistaken your man; high airs and wise saws
shall not carry it off thus. Besides, you termed me bully, and you shall
retract the word before we part."

"Faith, scarcely," said Ravenswood, "unless you show me better reason
for thinking myself mistaken than you are now producing."

"Then, Master," said Bucklaw, "though I should be sorry to offer it to a
man of your quality, if you will not justify your incivility, or retract
it, or name a place of meeting, you must here undergo the hard word and
the hard blow."

"Neither will be necessary," said Ravenswood; "I am satisfied with what
I have done to avoid an affair with you. If you are serious, this place
will serve as well as another."

"Dismount then, and draw," said Bucklaw, setting him an example. "I
always thought and said you were a pretty man; I should be sorry to
report you otherwise."

"You shall have no reason, sir," said Ravenswood, alighting, and putting
himself into a posture of defence.

Their swords crossed, and the combat commenced with great spirit on the
part of Bucklaw, who was well accustomed to affairs of the kind, and
distinguished by address and dexterity at his weapon. In the present
case, however, he did not use his skill to advantage; for, having
lost temper at the cool and contemptuous manner in which the Master of
Ravenswood had long refused, and at length granted, him satisfaction,
and urged by his impatience, he adopted the part of an assailant with
inconsiderate eagerness. The Master, with equal skill, and much greater
composure, remained chiefly on the defensive, and even declined to avail
himself of one or two advantages afforded him by the eagerness of his
adversary. At length, in a desperate lunge, which he followed with
an attempt to close, Bucklaw's foot slipped, and he fell on the short
grassy turf on which they were fighting. "Take your life, sir," said the
Master of Ravenswood, "and mend it if you can."

"It would be but a cobbled piece of work, I fear," said Bucklaw, rising
slowly and gathering up his sword, much less disconcerted with the issue
of the combat than could have been expected from the impetuosity of
his temper. "I thank you for my life, Master," he pursued. "There is my
hand; I bear no ill-will to you, either for my bad luck or your better
swordsmanship."

The Master looked steadily at him for an instant, then extended his hand
to him. "Bucklaw," he said, "you are a generous fellow, and I have done
you wrong. I heartily ask your pardon for the expression which offended
you; it was hastily and incautiously uttered, and I am convinced it is
totally misapplied."

"Are you indeed, Master?" said Bucklaw, his face resuming at once its
natural expression of light-hearted carelessness and audacity; "that is
more than I expected of you; for, Master, men say you are not ready to
retract your opinion and your language."

"Not when I have well considered them," said the Master.

"Then you are a little wiser than I am, for I always give my friend
satisfaction first, and explanation afterwards. If one of us falls, all
accounts are settled; if not, men are never so ready for peace as after
war. But what does that bawling brat of a boy want?" said Bucklaw. "I
wish to Heaven he had come a few minutes sooner! and yet it must have
been ended some time, and perhaps this way is as well as any other."

As he spoke, the boy he mentioned came up, cudgelling an ass, on which
he was mounted, to the top of its speed, and sending, like one of
Ossian's heroes, his voice before him: "Gentlemen--gentlemen, save
yourselves! for the gudewife bade us tell ye there were folk in her
house had taen Captain Craigengelt, and were seeking for Bucklaw, and
that ye behoved to ride for it." "By my faith, and that's very true, my
man" said Bucklaw; "and there's a silver sixpence for your news, and I
would give any man twice as much would tell me which way I should ride."

"That will I, Bucklaw," said Ravenswood; "ride home to Wolf's Crag with
me. There are places in the old tower where you might lie hid, were a
thousand men to seek you."

"But that will bring you into trouble yourself, Master; and unless you
be in the Jacobite scrape already, it is quite needless for me to drag
you in."

"Not a whit; I have nothing to fear."

"Then I will ride with you blythely, for, to say the truth, I do not
know the rendezvous that Craigie was to guide us to this night; and I am
sure that, if he is taken, he will tell all the truth of me, and twenty
lies of you, in order to save himself from the withie."

They mounted and rode off in company accordingly, striking off the
ordinary road, and holding their way by wild moorish unfrequented paths,
with which the gentlemen were well acquainted from the exercise of
the chase, but through which others would have had much difficulty in
tracing their course. They rode for some time in silence, making such
haste as the condition of Ravenswood's horse permitted, until night
having gradually closed around them, they discontinued their speed, both
from the difficulty of discovering their path, and from the hope that
they were beyond the reach of pursuit or observation.

"And now that we have drawn bridle a bit," said Bucklaw, "I would fain
ask you a question, Master."

"Ask and welcome," said Ravenswood, "but forgive not answering it,
unless I think proper."

"Well, it is simply this," answered his late antagonist "What, in
the name of old Sathan, could make you, who stand so highly on your
reputation, think for a moment of drawing up with such a rogue as
Craigengelt, and such a scapegrace as folk call Bucklaw?"

"Simply, because I was desperate, and sought desperate associates."

"And what made you break off from us at the nearest?" again demanded
Bucklaw.

"Because I had changed my mind," said the Master, "and renounced my
enterprise, at least for the present. And now that I have answered your
questions fairly and frankly, tell me what makes you associate with
Craigengelt, so much beneath you both in birth and in spirit?"

"In plain terms," answered Bucklaw, "because I am a fool, who have
gambled away my land in thse times. My grand-aunt, Lady Girnington, has
taen a new tack of life, I think, and I could only hope to get something
by a change of government. Craigie was a sort of gambling acquaintance;
he saw my condition, and, as the devil is always at one's elbow, told
me fifty lies about his credentials from Versailles, and his interest at
Saint Germains, promised me a captain's commission at Paris, and I have
been ass enough to put my thumb under his belt. I dare say, by this
time, he has told a dozen pretty stories of me to the government. And
this is what I have got by wine, women, and dice, cocks, dogs, and
horses."

"Yes, Bucklaw," said the Master, "you have indeed nourished in your
bosom the snakes that are now stinging you."

"That's home as well as true, Master," replied his companion; "but, by
your leave, you have nursed in your bosom one great goodly snake
that has swallowed all the rest, and is as sure to devour you as my
half-dozen are to make a meal on all that's left of Bucklaw, which is
but what lies between bonnet and boot-heel."

"I must not," answered the Master of Ravenswood, "challenge the
freedom of speech in which I have set example. What, to speak without
a metaphor, do you call this monstrous passion which you charge me with
fostering?"

"Revenge, my good sir--revenge; which, if it be as gentle manlike a sin
as wine and wassail, with their et coeteras, is equally unchristian, and
not so bloodless. It is better breaking a park-pale to watch a doe or
damsel than to shoot an old man."

"I deny the purpose," said the Master of Ravenswood. "On my soul, I had
no such intention; I meant but to confront the oppressor ere I left my
native land, and upbraid him with his tyranny and its consequences.
I would have stated my wrongs so that they would have shaken his soul
within him."

"Yes," answered Bucklaw, "and he would have collared you, and cried
'help,' and then you would have shaken the soul OUT of him, I suppose.
Your very look and manner would have frightened the old man to death."

"Consider the provocation," answered Ravenswood--"consider the ruin and
death procured and caused by his hard-hearted cruelty--an ancient house
destroyed, an affectionate father murdered! Why, in our old Scottish
days, he that sat quiet under such wrongs would have been held neither
fit to back a friend nor face a foe."

"Well, Master, I am glad to see that the devil deals as cunningly with
other folk as he deals with me; for whenever I am about to commit any
folly, he persuades me it is the most necessary, gallant, gentlemanlike
thing on earth, and I am up to saddlegirths in the bog before I see that
the ground is soft. And you, Master, might have turned out a murd----a
homicide, just out of pure respect for your father's memory."

"There is more sense in your language, Bucklaw," replied the Master,
"than might have been expected from your conduct. It is too true, our
vices steal upon us in forms outwardly as fair as those of the demons
whom the superstitious represent as intriguing with the human race, and
are not discovered in their native hideousness until we have clasped
them in our arms."

"But we may throw them from us, though," said Bucklaw, "and that is
what I shall think of doing one of these days--that is, when old Lady
Girnington dies."

"Did you ever hear the expression of the English divine?" said
Ravenswood--"'Hell is paved with good intentions,'--as much as to say,
they are more often formed than executed."

"Well," replied Bucklaw, "but I will begin this blessed night, and have
determined not to drink above one quart of wine, unless your claret be
of extraordinary quality."

"You will find little to tempt you at Wolf's Crag," said the Master. "I
know not that I can promise you more than the shelter of my roof; all,
and more than all, our stock of wine and provisions was exhausted at the
late occasion."

"Long may it be ere provision is needed for the like purpose," answered
Bucklaw; "but you should not drink up the last flask at a dirge; there
is ill luck in that."

"There is ill luck, I think, in whatever belongs to me," said
Ravenswood. "But yonder is Wolf's Crag, and whatever it still contains
is at your service."

The roar of the sea had long announced their approach to the cliffs, on
the summit of which, like the nest of some sea-eagle, the founder of the
fortalice had perched his eyrie. The pale moon, which had hitherto been
contending with flitting clouds, now shone out, and gave them a view
of the solitary and naked tower, situated on a projecting cliff that
beetled on the German Ocean. On three sides the rock was precipitous;
on the fourth, which was that towards the land, it had been originally
fenced by an artificial ditch and drawbridge, but the latter was broken
down and ruinous, and the former had been in part filled up, so as to
allow passage for a horseman into the narrow courtyard, encircled on two
sides with low offices and stables, partly ruinous, and closed on the
landward front by a low embattled wall, while the remaining side of the
quadrangle was occupied by the tower itself, which, tall and narrow, and
built of a greyish stone, stood glimmering in the moonlight, like
the sheeted spectre of some huge giant. A wilder or more disconsolate
dwelling it was perhaps difficult to conceive. The sombrous and heavy
sound of the billows, successively dashing against the rocky beach at a
profound distance beneath, was to the ear what the landscape was to the
eye--a symbol of unvaried and monotonous melancholy, not unmingled with
horror.

Although the night was not far advanced, there was no sign of living
inhabitant about this forlorn abode, excepting that one, and only
one, of the narrow and stanchelled windows which appeared at irregular
heights and distances in the walls of the building showed a small
glimmer of light.

"There," said Ravenswood, "sits the only male domestic that remains to
the house of Ravenswood; and it is well that he does remain there, since
otherwise we had little hope to find either light or fire. But follow me
cautiously; the road is narrow, and admits only one horse in front."

In effect, the path led along a kind of isthmus, at the peninsular
extremity of which the tower was situated, with that exclusive attention
to strength and security, in preference to every circumstances of
convenience, which dictated to the Scottish barons the choice of their
situations, as well as their style of building.

By adopting the cautious mode of approach recommended by the proprietor
of this wild hold, they entered the courtyard in safety. But it was long
ere the efforts of Ravenswood, though loudly exerted by knocking at the
low-browed entrance, and repeated shouts to Caleb to open the gate and
admit them, received any answer.

"The old man must be departed," he began to say, "or fallen into some
fit; for the noise I have made would have waked the seven sleepers."

At length a timid and hesitating voice replied: "Master--Master of
Ravenswood, is it you?"

"Yes, it is I, Caleb; open the door quickly."

"But it is you in very blood and body? For I would sooner face fifty
deevils as my master's ghaist, or even his wraith; wherefore, aroint ye,
if ye were ten times my master, unless ye come in bodily shape, lith and
limb." "It is I, you old fool," answered Ravenswood, "in bodily shape
and alive, save that I am half dead with cold."

The light at the upper window disappeared, and glancing from loophole to
loophole in slow succession, gave intimation that the bearer was in
the act of descending, with great deliberation, a winding staircase
occupying one of the turrets which graced the angles of the old tower.
The tardiness of his descent extracted some exclamations of impatience
from Ravenswood, and several oaths from his less patient and more
mecurial companion. Caleb again paused ere he unbolted the door, and
once more asked if they were men of mould that demanded entrance at this
time of night.

"Were I near you, you old fool," said Bucklaw, "I would give you
sufficient proofs of MY bodily condition."

"Open the gate, Caleb," said his master, in a more soothing tone, partly
from his regard to the ancient and faithful seneschal, partly perhaps
because he thought that angry words would be thrown away, so long as
Caleb had a stout iron-clenched oaken door betwixt his person and the
speakers.

At length Caleb, with a trembling hand, undid the bars, opened the
heavy door, and stood before them, exhibiting his thin grey hairs, bald
forehead, and sharp high features, illuminated by a quivering lamp which
he held in one hand, while he shaded and protected its flame with the
other. The timorous, courteous glance which he threw around him, the
effect of the partial light upon his white hair and illumined features,
might have made a good painting; but our travellers were too impatient
for security against the rising storm to permit them to indulge
themselves in studying the picturesque. "Is it you, my dear master?--is
it you yourself, indeed?" exclaimed the old domestic. "I am wae ye suld
hae stude waiting at your ain gate; but wha wad hae thought o' seeing ye
sae sune, and a strange gentleman with a--(Here he exclaimed apart, as
it were, and to some inmate of the tower, in a voice not meant to be
heard by those in the court)--Mysie--Mysie, woman! stir for dear life,
and get the fire mended; take the auld three-legged stool, or ony
thing that's readiest that will make a lowe. I doubt we are but puirly
provided, no expecting ye this some months, when doubtless ye was
hae been received conform till your rank, as gude right is; but
natheless----"

"Natheless, Caleb," said the Master, "we must have our horses put up,
and ourselves too, the best way we can. I hope you are not sorry to see
me sooner than you expected?"

"Sorry, my lord! I am sure ye sall aye be my lord wi' honest folk, as
your noble ancestors hae been these three hundred years, and never asked
a Whig's leave. Sorry to see the Lord of Ravenswood at ane o' his ain
castles! (Then again apart to his unseen associate behind the screen)
Mysie, kill the brood-hen without thinking twice on it; let them care
that come ahint. No to say it's our best dwelling," he added, turning
to Bucklaw; "but just a strength for the Lord of Ravenswood to flee
until--that is, no to FLEE, but to retreat until in troublous times,
like the present, when it was ill convenient for him to live farther in
the country in ony of his better and mair principal manors; but, for its
antiquity, maist folk think that the outside of Wolf's Crag is worthy of
a large perusal."

"And you are determined we shall have time to make it," said Ravenswood,
somewhat amused with the shifts the old man used to detain them without
doors until his confederate Mysie had made her preparations within.

"Oh, never mind the outside of the house, my good friend," said Bucklaw;
"let's see the inside, and let our horses see the stable, that's all."
"Oh yes, sir--ay, sir--unquestionably, sir--my lord and ony of his
honourable companions----"

"But our horses, my friend--our horses; they will be dead-founded by
standing here in the cold after riding hard, and mine is too good to be
spoiled; therefore, once more, our horses!" exclaimed Bucklaw.

"True--ay--your horses--yes--I will call the grooms"; and sturdily did
Caleb roar till the old tower rang again: "John--William--Saunders!
The lads are gane out, or sleeping," he observed, after pausing for an
answer, which he knew that he had no human chance of receiving. "A'
gaes wrang when the Master's out-bye; but I'll take care o' your cattle
mysell."

"I think you had better," said Ravenswood, "otherwise I see little
chance of their being attended to at all."

"Whisht, my lord--whisht, for God's sake," said Caleb, in an imploring
tone, and apart to his master; "if ye dinna regard your ain credit,
think on mine; we'll hae hard eneugh wark to make a decent night o't,
wi' a' the lees I can tell."

"Well, well, never mind," said his master; "go to the stable. There is
hay and corn, I trust?"

"Ou ay, plenty of hay and corn"; this was uttered boldly and aloud, and,
in a lower tone, "there was some half fous o' aits, and some taits o'
meadow-hay, left after the burial."

"Very well," said Ravenswood, taking the lamp from his domestic's
unwilling hand, "I will show the stranger upstairs myself."

"I canna think o' that, my lord; if ye wad but have five minutes, or ten
minutes, or, at maist, a quarter of an hour's patience, and look at the
fine moonlight prospect of the Bass and North Berwick Law till I sort
the horses, I would marshal ye up, as reason is ye suld be marshalled,
your lordship and your honourable visitor. And I hae lockit up the
siller candlesticks, and the lamp is not fit----"

"It will do very well in the mean time," said Ravenswood, "and you will
have no difficulty for want of light in the stable, for, if I recollect,
half the roof is off."

"Very true, my lord," replied the trusty adherent, and with ready wit
instantly added, "and the lazy sclater loons have never come to put it
on a' this while, your lordship."

"If I were disposed to jest at the calamities of my house," said
Ravenswood, as he led the way upstairs, "poor old Caleb would furnish me
with ample means. His passion consists in representing things about our
miserable menage, not as they are, but as, in his opinion, they ought
to be; and, to say the truth, I have been often diverted with the poor
wretch's expedients to supply what he though was essential for the credit
of the family, and his still more generous apologies for the want of
those articles for which his ingenuity could discover no substitute.
But though the tower is none of the largest, I shall have some trouble
without him to find the apartment in which there is a fire."

As he spoke thus, he opened the door of the hall. "Here, at least," he
said, "there is neither hearth nor harbour."

It was indeed a scene of desolation. A large vaulted room, the beams of
which, combined like those of Westminster Hall, were rudely carved at
the extremities, remained nearly in the situation in which it had been
left after the entertainment at Allan Lord Ravenswood's funeral.
Overturned pitchers, and black-jacks, and pewter stoups, and flagons
still cumbered the large oaken table; glasses, those more perishable
implements of conviviality, many of which had been voluntarily
sacrificed by the guests in their enthusiastic pledges to favourite
toasts, strewed the stone floor with their fragments. As for the
articles of plate, lent for the purpose by friends and kinsfolk, those
had been carefully withdrawn so soon as the ostentatious display of
festivity, equally unnecessary and strangely timed, had been made and
ended. Nothing, in short, remained that indicated wealth; all the signs
were those of recent wastefulness and present desolation. The black
cloth hangings, which, on the late mournful occasion, replaced the
tattered moth-eaten tapestries, had been partly pulled down, and,
dangling from the wall in irregular festoons, disclosed the rough
stonework of the building, unsmoothed either by plaster or the chisel.
The seats thrown down, or left in disorder, intimated the careless
confusion which had concluded the mournful revel. "This room," said
Ravenswood, holding up the lamp--"this room, Mr. Hayston, was riotous
when it should have been sad; it is a just retribution that it should
now be sad when it ought to be cheerful."

They left this disconsolate apartment, and went upstairs, where, after
opening one or two doors in vain, Ravenswood led the way into a little
matted ante-room, in which, to their great joy, they found a tolerably
good fire, which Mysie, by some such expedient as Caleb had suggested,
had supplied with a reasonable quantity of fuel. Glad at the heart to see
more of comfort than the castle had yet seemed to offer, Bucklaw rubbed
his hands heartily over the fire, and now listened with more complacency
to the apologies which the Master of Ravenswood offered. "Comfort," he
said, "I cannot provide for you, for I have it not for myself; it
is long since these walls have known it, if, indeed, they were ever
acquainted with it. Shelter and safety, I think, I can promise you."

"Excellent matters, Master," replied Bucklaw, "and, with a mouthful of
food and wine, positively all I can require to-night."

"I fear," said the Master, "your supper will be a poor one; I hear
the matter in discussion betwixt Caleb and Mysie. Poor Balderstone is
something deaf, amongst his other accomplishments, so that much of what
he means should be spoken aside is overheard by the whole audience, and
especially by those from whom he is most anxious to conceal his private
manoeuvres. Hark!"

They listened, and heard the old domestic's voice in conversation with
Mysie to the following effect:

"Just mak the best o't--make the besto't, woman; it's easy to put a fair
face on ony thing."

"But the auld brood-hen? She'll be as teugh as bow-strings and
bend-leather!"

"Say ye made a mistake--say ye made a mistake, Mysie," replied the
faithful seneschal, in a soothing and undertoned voice; "tak it a' on
yoursell; never let the credit o' the house suffer."

"But the brood-hen," remonstrated Mysie--"ou, she's sitting some gate
aneath the dais in the hall, and I am feared to gae in in the dark for
the dogle; and if I didna see the bogle, I could as ill see the hen, for
it's pit-mirk, and there's no another light in the house, save that very
blessed lamp whilk the Master has in his ain hand. And if I had the hen,
she's to pu', and to draw, and to dress; how can I do that, and them
sitting by the only fire we have?"

"Weel, weel, Mysie," said the butler, "bide ye there a wee, and I'll try
to get the lamp wiled away frae them."

Accordingly, Caleb Balderstone entered the apartment, little aware that
so much of his by-play had been audible there. "Well, Caleb, my old
friend, is there any chance of supper?" said the Master of Ravenswood.

"CHANCE of supper, your lordship?" said Caleb, with an emphasis of
strong scorn at the implied doubt. "How should there be ony question
of that, and us in your lordship's house? Chance of supper, indeed! But
ye'll no be for butcher-meat? There's walth o' fat poultry, ready either
for spit or brander. The fat capon, Mysie!" he added, calling out as
boldly as if such a thing had been in existence.

"Quite unnecessary," said Bucklaw, who deemed himself bound in courtesy
to relieve some part of the anxious butler's perplexity, "if you have
anything cold, or a morsel of bread."

"The best of bannocks!" exclaimed Caleb, much relieve; "and, for cauld
meat, a' that we hae is cauld eneugh,--how-beit, maist of the cauld meat
and pastry was gien to the poor folk after the ceremony of interment, as
gude reason was; nevertheless----"

"Come, Caleb," said the Master of Ravenswood, "I must cut this matter
short. This is the young Laird of Bucklaw; he is under hiding, and
therefore, you know----"

"He'll be nae nicer than your lordship's honour, I'se warrant," answered
Caleb, cheerfully, with a nod of intelligence; "I am sorry that the
gentleman is under distress, but I am blythe that he canna say muckle
agane our housekeeping, for I believe his ain pinches may matach ours;
no that we are pinched, thank God," he added, retracting the admission
which he had made in his first burst of joy, "but nae doubt we are waur
aff than we hae been, or suld be. And for eating--what signifies telling
a lee? there's just the hinder end of the mutton-ham that has been but
three times on the table, and the nearer the bane the sweeter, as your
honours weel ken; and--there's the heel of the ewe-milk kebbuck, wi' a
bit of nice butter, and--and--that's a' that's to trust to." And with
great alacrity he produced his slender stock of provisions, and placed
them with much formality upon a small round table betwixt the two
gentlemen, who were not deterred either by the homely quality or limited
quantity of the repast from doing it full justice. Caleb in the mean
while waited on them with grave officiousness, as if anxious to make up,
by his own respectful assiduity, for the want of all other attendance.

But, alas! how little on such occasions can form, however anxiously and
scrupulously observed, supply the lack of substantial fare! Bucklaw,
who had eagerly eaten a considerable portion of the thrice-sacked
mutton-ham, now began to demand ale.

"I wadna just presume to recommend our ale," said Caleb; "the maut was
ill made, and there was awfu' thunner last week; but siccan water as the
Tower well has ye'll seldome see, Bucklaw, and that I'se engage for."

"But if your ale is bad, you can let us have some wine," said Bucklaw,
making a grimace at the mention of the pure element which Caleb so
earnestly recommended.

"Wine!" answered Caleb, undauntedly, "eneugh of wine! It was but twa
days syne--wae's me for the cause--there was as much wine drunk in this
house as would have floated a pinnace. There never was lack of wine at
Wolf's Crag."

"Do fetch us some then," said the master, "instead of talking about it."
And Caleb boldly departed.

Every expended butt in the old cellar did he set a-tilt, and shake with
the desperate expectation of collecting enough of the grounds of claret
to fill the large pewter measure which he carred in his hand. Alas!
each had been too devoutly drained; and, with all the squeezing and
manoeuvring which his craft as a butler suggested, he could only collect
about half a quart that seemed presentable. Still, however, Caleb was
too good a general to renounce the field without a strategem to cover
his retreat. He undauntedly threw down an empty flagon, as if he had
stumbled at the entrance of the apartment, called upon Mysie to wipe up
the wine that had never been spilt, and placing the other vessel on the
table, hoped there was still enough left for their honours. There
was indeed; for even Bucklaw, a sworn friend to the grape, found no
encouragement to renew his first attack upon the vintage of Wolf's
Crag, but contented himself, however reluctantly, with a draught of
fair water. Arrangements were now made for his repose; and as the
secret chamber was assigned for this purpose, it furnished Caleb with a
first-rate and most plausible apology for all deficiencies of furniture,
bedding, etc.

"For wha," said he, "would have thought of the secret chaumer being
needed? It has not been used since the time of the Gowrie Conspiracy,
and I durst never let a woman ken of the entrance to it, or your honour
will allow that it wad not hae been a secret chaumer lang."





CHAPTER VIII.

     The hearth in hall was black and dead,
     No board was dight in bower within,
     Nor merry bowl nor welcome bed;
     "Here's sorry cheer," quoth the Heir of Linne.

     Old Ballad

THE feelings of the prodigal Heir of Linne, as expressed in that
excellent old song, when, after dissipating his whole fortune, he found
himself the deserted inhabitant of "the lonely lodge," might perhaps
have some resemblance to those of the Master of Ravenswood in his
deserted mansion of Wolf's Crag. The Master, however, had this advantage
over the spendthrift in the legend, that, if he was in similar distress,
he could not impute it to his own imprudence. His misery had been
bequeathed to him by his father, and, joined to his high blood, and to
a title which the courteous might give or the churlish withhold at their
pleasure, it was the whole inheritance he had derived from his ancestry.
Perhaps this melancholy yet consolatory reflection crossed the mind of
the unfortunate young nobleman with a breathing of comfort. Favourable
to calm reflection, as well as to the Muses, the morning, while it
dispelled the shades of night, had a composing and sedative effect upon
the stormy passions by which the Master of Ravenswood had been agitated
on the preceding day. He now felt himself able to analyse the different
feelings by which he was agitated, and much resolved to combat and
to subdue them. The morning, which had arisen calm and bright, gave a
pleasant effect even to the waste moorland view which was seen from the
castle on looking to the landward; and the glorious ocean, crisped with
a thousand rippling waves of silver, extended on the other side, in
awful yet complacent majesty, to the verge of the horizon. With such
scenes of calm sublimity the human heart sympathises even in its most
disturbed moods, and deeds of honour and virtue are inspired by their
majestic influence. To seek out Bucklaw in the retreat which he had
afforded him, was the first occupation of the Master, after he had
performed, with a scrutiny unusually severe, the important task of
self-examination. "How now, Bucklaw?" was his morning's salutation--"how
like you the couch in which the exiled Earl of Angus once slept
in security, when he was pursued by the full energy of a king's
resentment?"

"Umph!" returned the sleeper awakened; "I have little to complain of
where so great a man was quartered before me, only the mattress was of
the hardest, the vault somewhat damp, the rats rather more mutinous than
I would have expected from the state of Caleb's larder; and if there had
been shutters to that grated window, or a curtain to the bed, I should
think it, upon the whole, an improvement in your accommodations."

"It is, to be sure, forlorn enough," said the Master, looking around the
small vault; "but if you will rise and leave it, Caleb will endeavour to
find you a better breakfast than your supper of last night."

"Pray, let it be no better," said Bucklaw, getting up, and endeavouring
to dress himself as well as the obscurity of the place would
permit--"let it, I say, be no better, if you mean me to preserve in my
proposed reformation. The very recollection of Caleb's beverage has done
more to suppress my longing to open the day with a morning draught than
twenty sermons would have done. And you, master, have you been able to
give battle valiantly to your bosom-snake? You see I am in the way of
smothering my vipers one by one."

"I have commenced the battle, at least, Bucklaw, adn I have had a fair
vision of an angel who descended to my assistance," replied the Master.

"Woe's me!" said his guest, "no vision can I expect, unless my aunt,
Lady Grinington, should betake herself to the tomb; and then it would be
the substance of her heritage rather than the appearance of her phantom
that I should consider as the support of my good resolutions. But this
same breakfast, Master--does the deer that is to make the pasty run yet
on foot, as the ballad has it?"

"I will inquire into that matter," said his entertainer; and, leaving
the apartment, he went in search of Caleb, whom, after some difficulty,
he found in an obscure sort of dungeon, which had been in former times
the buttery of the castle. Here the old man was employed busily in the
doubtful task of burnishing a pewter flagon until it should take the
hue and semblance of silver-plate. "I think it may do--I think it might
pass, if they winna bring it ower muckle in the light o' the window!"
were the ejaculations which he muttered from time to time, as if to
encourage himself in his undertaking, when he was interrupted by the
voice of his master.

"Take this," said the Master of Ravenswood, "and get what is necessary
for the family." And with these words he gave to the old butler the
purse which had on the preceding evening so narrowly escaped the fangs
of Craigengelt.

The old man shook his silvery and thin locks, and looked with an
expression of the most heartfelt anguish at his master as he weighed in
his hand the slender treasure, and said in a sorrowful voice, "And is
this a' that's left?"

"All that is left at present," said the Master, affecting more
cheerfulness than perhaps he really felt, "is just the green purse and
the wee pickle gowd, as the old song says; but we shall do better one
day, Caleb."

"Before that day domes," said Caleb, "I doubt there will be an end of
an auld sang, and an auld serving-man to boot. But it disna become me to
speak that gate to your honour, adn you looking sae pale. Tak back
the purse, and keep it to be making a show before company; for if your
honour would just take a bidding, adn be whiles taking it out afore folk
and putting it up again, there's naebody would refuse us trust, for a'
that's come and gane yet."

"But, Caleb," said the Master, "I still intend to leave this country
very soon, and desire to do so with the reputation of an honest man,
leaving no debty behind me, at last of my own contracting."

"And gude right ye suld gang away as a true man, and so ye shall; for
auld Caleb can tak the wyte of whatever is taen on for the house, and
then it will be a' just ae man's burden; and I will live just as weel in
the tolbooth as out of it, and the credit of the family will be a' safe
and sound."

The Master endeavoured, in vain, to make Caleb comprehend that the
butler's incurring the responsibility of debts in his own person would
rather add to than remove the objections which he had to their being
contracted. He spoke to a premier too busy in devising ways and means to
puzzle himself with refuting the arguments offered against their justice
or expediency.

"There's Eppie Sma'trash will trust us for ale," said Caleb to
himself--"she has lived a' her life under the family--and maybe wi' a
soup brandy; I canna say for wine--she is but a lone woman, and gets
her claret by a runlet at a time; but I'll work a wee drap out o' her by
fair means or foul. For doos, there's the doocot; there will be poultry
amang the tenants, though Luckie Chirnside says she has paid the kain
twice ower. We'll mak shift, an it like your honour--we'll mak shift;
keep your heart abune, for the house sall haud its credit as lang as
auld Caleb is to the fore."

The entertainment which the old man's exertions of various kinds
enabled him to present to the young gentlemen for three or four days was
certainly of no splendid description, but it may readily be believed
it was set before no critical guests; and even the distresses, excuses,
evasions, and shifts of Caleb afforded amusement to the young men, and
added a sort of interest to the scrambling and irregular style of their
table. They had indeed occasion to seize on every circumstance that
might serve to diversify or enliven time, which otherwise passed away so
heavily.

Bucklaw, shut out from his usual field-sports and joyous carouses by the
necessity of remaining concealed within the walls of the castle, became
a joyless and uninteresting companion. When the Master of Ravenswood
would no longer fence or play at shovel-board; when he himself had
polished to the extremity the coat of his palfrey with brush, curry
comb, and hair-cloth; when he had seen him eat his provender, and
gently lie down in his stall, he could hardly help envying the animal's
apparent acquiescence in a life so monotonous. "The stupid brute," he
said, "thinks neither of the race-ground or the hunting-field, or
his green paddock at Bucklaw, but enjoys himself as comfortably when
haltered to the rack in this ruinous vault, as if he had been foaled
in it; and, I who have the freedom of a prisoner at large, to range
through the dungeons of this wretched old tower, can hardly,
betwixt whistling and sleeping, contrive to pass away the hour till
dinner-time."

And with this disconsolate reflection, he wended his way to the bartizan
or battlements of the tower, to watch what objects might appear on the
distant moor, or to pelt, with pebbles and pieces of lime, the sea-mews
and cormorants which established themselves incautiously within the
reach of an idle young man.

Ravenswood, with a mind incalculably deeper and more powerful than that
of his companion, had his own anxious subjects of reflection, which
wrought for him the same unhappiness that sheer enui and want of
occupation inflicted on his companion. The first sight of Lucy Ashton
had been less impressive than her image proved to be upon reflection. As
the depth and violence of that revengeful passion by which he had been
actuated in seeking an interview with the father began to abate by
degrees, he looked back on his conduct towards the daughter as harsh
and unworthy towards a female of rank and beauty. Her looks of grateful
acknowledgment, her words of affectionate courtesy, had been repelled
with something which approached to disdain; and if the Master of
Ravenswood had sustained wrongs at the hand of Sir William Ashton, his
conscience told him they had been unhandsomely resented towards his
daughter. When his thoughts took this turn of self-reproach, the
recollection of Lucy Ashton's beautiful features, rendered yet more
interesting by the circumstances in which their meeting had taken place,
made an impression upon his mind at once soothing and painful. The
sweetness of her voice, the delicacy of her expressions, the vivid glow
of her filial affection, embittered his regret at having repulsed her
gratitude with rudeness, while, at the same time, they placed before his
imagination a picture of the most seducing sweetness.

Even young Ravenswood's strength of moral feeling and rectitude of
purpose at once increased the danger of cherishing these recollections,
and the propensity to entertain them. Firmly resolved as he was to
subdue, if possible, the predominating vice in his character, he
admitted with willingness--nay, he summoned up in his imagination--the
ideas by which it could be most powerfully counteracted; and, while he
did so, a sense of his own harsh conduct towards the daughter of his
enemy naturally induced him, as if by way of recompense, to invest her
with more of grace and beauty than perhaps she could actually claim.

Had any one at this period told the Master of Ravenswood that he had
so lately vowed vengeance against the whole lineage of him whom he
considered, not unjustly, as author of his father's ruin and death, he
might at first have repelled the charge as a foul calumny; yet, upon
serious self-examination, he would have been compelled to admit that it
had, at one period, some foundation in truth, though, according to the
present tone of his sentiments, it was difficult to believe that this
had really been the case.

There already existed in his bosom two contradictory passions--a desire
to revenge the death of his father, strangely qualified by admiration of
his enemy's daughter. Against the former feeling he had struggled, until
it seemed to him upon the wane; against the latter he used no means of
resistance, for he did not suspect its existence. That this was actually
the case was chiefly evinced by his resuming his resolution to leave
Scotland. Yet, though such was his purpose, he remained day after day at
Wolf's Crag, without taking measures for carrying it into execution.
It is true, that he had written to one or two kinsmen who resided in a
distant quarter of Scotland, and particularly to the Marquis of A----,
intimating his purpose; and when pressed upon the subject by Bucklaw, he
was wont to allege the necessity of waiting for their reply, especially
that of the Marquis, before taking so decisive a measure.

The Marquis was rich and powerful; and although he was suspected to
entertain sentiments unfavourable to the government established at the
Revolution, he had nevertheless address enough to head a party in
the Scottish privy council, connected with the High Church faction in
England, and powerful enough to menace those to whom the Lord Keeper
adhered with a probable subversion of their power. The consulting with
a personage of such importance was a plausible excise, which Ravenswood
used to Bucklaw, and probably to himself, for continuing his residence
at Wolf's Crag; and it was rendered yet more so by a general report
which began to be current of a probable change of ministers and measures
in the Scottish administration. The rumours, strongly asserted by
some, and as resolutely denied by others, as their wishes or interest
dictated, found their way even to the ruinous Tower of Wolf's Crag,
chiefly through the medium of Caleb, the butler, who, among his other
excellences, was an ardent politician, and seldom made an excursion
from the old fortress to the neighbouring village of Wolf's Hope without
bringing back what tidings were current in the vicinity.

But if Bucklaw could not offer any satisfactory objections to the delay
of the Master in leaving Scotland, he did not the less suffer with
impatience the state of inaction to which it confined him; and it was
only the ascendency which his new companion had acquired over him that
induced him to submit to a course of life so alien to his habits and
inclinations.

"You were wont to be thought a stirring active young fellow, Master,"
was his frequent remonstrance; "yet here you seem determined to live
on and on like a rat in a hole, with this trifling difference, that the
wiser vermin chooses a hermitage where he can find food at least; but as
for us, Caleb's excuses become longer as his diet turns more spare, and
I fear we shall realise the stories they tell of the slother: we have
almost eat up the last green leaf on the plant, and have nothing left
for it but to drop from the tree and break our necks."

"Do not fear it," said Ravenswood; "there is a fate watches for us, and
we too have a stake in the revolution that is now impending, and which
already has alarmed many a bosom."

"What fate--what revolution?" inquired his companion. "We have had one
revolution too much already, I think."

Ravenswood interrupted him by putting into his hands a letter.

"Oh," answered Bucklaw, "my dream's out. I thought I heard Caleb this
morning pressing some unfortunate fellow to a drink of cold water, and
assuring him it was better for his stomach in the morning than ale or
brandy."

"It was my Lord of A----'s courier," said Ravenswood, "who was doomed to
experience his ostentatious hospitality, which I believe ended in sour
beer and herrings. Read, and you will see the news he has brought us."
"I will as fast as I can," said Bucklaw; "but I am no great clerk, nor
does his lordship seem to be the first of scribes."

The reader will peruse in, a few seconds, by the aid our friend
Ballantyne's types, what took Bucklaw a good half hour in perusal,
though assisted by the Master of Ravenswood. The tenor was as follows:


"RIGHT HONOURABLE OUR COUSIN:

"Our hearty commendations premised, these come to assure you of the
interest which we take in your welfare, and in your purpose towards its
augmentation. If we have been less active in showing forth our effective
good-will towards you than, as a loving kinsman and blood-relative, we
would willingly have desired, we request that you will impute it to lack
of opportunity to show our good-liking, not to any coldness of our will
Touching your resolution to travel in foreign parts, as at this time we
hold the same little advisable, in respect that your ill-willers may,
according to the custom of such persons, impute motives for your
journey, whereof, although we know and believe you to be as clear as
ourselves, yet natheless their words may find credence in places where
the belief in them may much prejudice you, and which we should see with
more unwillingness and displeasure than with means of remedy.

"Having thus, as becometh our kindred, given you our poor mind on the
subject of your journeying forth of Scotland, we would willingly
add reasons of weight, which might materially advantage you and your
father's house, thereby to determine you to abide at Wolf's Crag, until
this harvest season shall be passed over. But what sayeth the proverb,
verbum sapienti--a word is more to him that hath wisdom than a sermon to
a fool. And albeit we have written this poor scroll with our own hand,
and are well assured of the fidelity of our messenger, as him that is
many ways bounden to us, yet so it is, that sliddery ways crave wary
walking, and that we may not peril upon paper matters which we would
gladly impart to you by word of mouth. Wherefore, it was our purpose to
have prayed you heartily to come to this our barren Highland country to
kill a stag, and to treat of the matters which we are now more painfully
inditing to you anent. But commodity does not serve at present for such
our meeting, which, therefore, shall be deferred until sic time as we
may in all mirth rehearse those things whereof we now keep silence.
Meantime, we pray you to think that we are, and will still be, your good
kinsman and well-wisher, waiting but for times of whilk we do, as it
were, entertain a twilight prospect, and appear and hope to be also your
effectual well-doer. And in which hope we heartily write ourself,

"Right Honourable,

"Your loving cousin,

"A----.
"Given from our poor house of B----," etc.


Superscribed--"For the right honourable, and our honoured kinsman, the
Master of Ravenswood--These, with haste, haste, post haste--ride and run
until these be delivered."

"What think you of this epistle, Bucklaw?" said the Master, when his
companion had hammered out all the sense, and almost all the words of
which it consisted.

"Truly, that the Marquis's meaning is as great a riddle as his
manuscript. He is really in much need of _Wit's Interpreter_, or the
_Complete Letter-Writer_, and were I you, I would send him a copy by the
bearer. He writes you very kindly to remain wasting your time and
your money in this vile, stupid, oppressed country, without so much as
offering you the countenance and shelter of his house. In my opinion, he
has some scheme in view in which he supposes you can be useful, and he
wishes to keep you at hand, to make use of you when it ripens,
reserving the power of turning you adrift, should his plot fail in the
concoction."

"His plot! Then you suppose it is a treasonable business," answered
Ravenswood.

"What else can it be?" replied Bucklaw; "the Marquis has been long
suspected to have an eye to Saint Germains."

"He should not engage me rashly in such an adventure," said Ravenswood;
"when I recollect the times of the first and second Charles, and of the
last James, truly I see little reason that, as a man or a patriot, I
should draw my sword for their descendants."

"Humph!" replied Bucklaw; "so you have set yourself down to mourn over
the crop-eared dogs whom honest Claver'se treated as they deserved?"

"They first gave the dogs an ill name, and then hanged them," replied
Ravenswood. "I hope to see the day when justice shall be open to Whig
and Tory, and when these nicknames shall only be used among coffee-house
politicians, as 'slut' and 'jade' are among apple-women, as cant terms
of idle spite and rancour."

"That will nto be in our days, Master: the iron has entered too deeply
into our sides and our souls."

"It will be, however, one day," replied the Master; "men will not always
start at these nicknames as at a trumpet-sound. As social life is better
protected, its comforts will become too dear to be hazarded without some
better reasons than speculative politics."

"It is fine talking," answered Bucklaw; "but my heart is with the old
song--

     To see good corn upon the rigs,
     And a gallow built to hang the Whigs,
     And the right restored where the right should be.
     Oh, that is the thing that would wanton me."

"You may sing as loudly as you will, cantabit vacuus----," answered the
Master; "but I believe the Marquis is too wise, at least too wary, to
join you in such a burden. I suspect he alludes to a revolution in the
Scottish privy council, rather than in the British kingdoms."

"Oh, confusion to your state tricks!" exclaimed Bucklaw--"your cold
calculating manoeuvres, which old gentlemen in wrought nightcaps
and furred gowns execute like so many games at chess, and displace a
treasurer or lord commissioner as they would take a rook or a pawn.
Tennis for my sport, and battle for my earnest! And you, Master, so dep
and considerate as you would seem, you have that within you makes
the blood boil faster than suits your present humour of moralising on
political truths. You are one of those wise men who see everything with
great composure till their blood is up, and then--woe to any one who
should put them in mind of their own prudential maxims!" "Perhaps," said
Ravenswood, "you read me more rightly than I can myself. But to think
justly will certainly go some length in helping me to act so. But hark!
I hear Caleb tolling the dinner-bell."

"Which he always does with the more sonorous grace in proportion to the
meagreness of the cheer which he has provided," said Bucklaw; "as if
that infernal clang and jangle, which will one day bring the belfry
down the cliff, could convert a starved hen into a fat capon, and a
blade-bone of mutton into a haunch of venison."

"I wish we may be so well off as your worst conjectures surmise,
Bucklaw, from the extreme solemnity and ceremony with which Caleb seems
to place on the table that solitary covered dish."

"Uncover, Caleb! uncover, for Heaven's sake!" said Bucklaw; "let us have
what you can give us without preface. Why, it stands well enough, man,"
he continued, addressing impatiently the ancient butler, who, without
reply, kept shifting the dish, until he had at length placed it with
mathematical precision in the very midst of the table.

"What have we got here, Caleb?" inquired the Master in his turn.

"Ahem! sir, ye suld have known before; but his honour the Laird of
Bucklaw is so impatient," answered Caleb, still holding the dish with
one hand and the cover with the other, with evident reluctance to
disclose the contents.

"But what is it, a God's name--not a pair of clean spurs, I hope, in the
Border fashion of old times?"

"Ahem! ahem!" reiterated Caleb, "your honour is pleased to be facetious;
natheless, I might presume to say it was a convenient fashion, and used,
as I have heard, in an honourable and thriving family. But touching your
present dinner, I judged that this being St. Magdalen's [Margaret's]
Eve, who was a worthy queen of Scotland in her day, your honours might
judge it decorous, if not altogether to fast, yet only to sustain nature
with some slight refection, as ane saulted herring or the like." And,
uncovering the dish, he displayed four of the savoury fishes which he
mentioned, adding, in a subdued tone, "that they were no just common
herring neither, being every ane melters, and sauted with uncommon care
by the housekeeper (poor Mysie) for his honour's especial use."

"Out upon all apologies!" said the Master, "let us eat the herrings,
since there is nothing better to be had; but I begin to think with you,
Bucklaw, that we are consuming the last green leaf, and that, in spite
of the Marquis's political machinations, we must positively shift camp
for want of forage, without waiting the issue of them."




CHAPTER IX.

     Ay, and when huntsmen wind the merry horn,
     And from its covert starts the fearful prey,
     Who, warm'd with youth's blood in his swelling veins,
     Would, like a lifeless clod, outstretched lie,
     Shut out from all the fair creation offers?

     Ethwald, Act I. Scene 1.

LIGHT meals procure light slumbers; and therefore it is not surprising
that, considering the fare which Caleb's conscience, or his necessity,
assuming, as will sometimes happen, that disguise, had assigned to the
guests of Wolf's Crag, their slumbers should have been short.

In the morning Bucklaw rushed into his host's apartment with a loud
halloo, which might have awaked the dead.

"Up! up! in the name of Heaven! The hunters are out, the only piece of
sport I have seen this month; and you lie here, Master, on a bed that
has little to recommend it, except that it may be something softer than
the stone floor of your ancestor's vault."

"I wish," said Ravenswood, raising his head peevishly, "you had forborne
so early a jest, Mr. Hayston; it is really no pleasure to lose the very
short repose which I had just begun to enjoy, after a night spent in
thoughts upon fortune far harder than my couch, Bucklaw."

"Pschaw, pshaw!" replied his guest; "get up--get up; the hounds are
abroad. I have saddled the horses myself, for old Caleb was calling for
grooms and lackeys, and would never have proceeded without two hours'
apology for the absence of men that were a hundred miles off. Get up,
Master; I say the hounds are out--get up, I say; the hunt is up." And
off ran Bucklaw.

"And I say," said the Master, rising slowly, "that nothing can concern
me less. Whose hounds come so near to us?"

"The Honourable Lord Brittlebrains's," answered Caleb, who had followed
the impatient Laird of Bucklaw into his master's bedroom, "and truly I
ken nae title they have to be yowling and howling within the freedoms
and immunities of your lordship's right of free forestry."

"Nor I, Caleb," replied Ravenswood, "excepting that they have bought
both the lands and the right of forestry, and may think themselves
entitled to exercise the rights they have paid their money for."

"It may be sae, my lord," replied Caleb; "but it's no gentleman's deed
of them to come here and exercise such-like right, and your lordship
living at your ain castle of Wolf's Crag. Lord Brittlebrains would weel
to remember what his folk have been."

"And what we now are," said the Master, with suppressed bitterness of
feeling. "But reach me my cloak, Caleb, and I will indulge Bucklaw with
a sight of this chase. It is selfish to sacrifice my guest's pleasure to
my own."

"Sacrifice!" echoed Caleb, in a tone which seemed to imply the total
absurdity of his master making the least concession in deference to any
one--"sacrifice, indeed!--but I crave your honour's pardon, and whilk
doublet is it your pleasure to wear?"

"Any one you will, Caleb; my wardrobe, I suppose, is not very
extensive."

"Not extensive!" echoed his assistant; "when there is the grey and
silver that your lordship bestowed on Hew Hildebrand, your outrider;
and the French velvet that went with my lord your father--be gracious
to him!--my lord your father's auld wardrobe to the puir friends of the
family; and the drap-de-Berry----"

"Which I gave to you, Caleb, and which, I suppose, is the only dress we
have any chance to come at, except that I wore yesterday; pray, hand me
that, and say no more about it."

"If your honour has a fancy," replied Caleb, "and doubtless it's a
sad-coloured suit, and you are in mourning; nevertheless, I have never
tried on the drap-de-Berry--ill wad it become me--and your honour having
no change of claiths at this present--and it's weel brushed, and as
there are leddies down yonder----"

"Ladies!" said Ravenswood; "and what ladies, pray?"

"What do I ken, your lordship? Looking down at them from the Warden's
Tower, I could but see them glent by wi' their bridles ringing and their
feathers fluttering, like the court of Elfland."

"Well, well, Caleb," replied the Master, "help me on with my cloak, and
hand me my sword-belt. What clatter is that in the courtyard?"

"Just Bucklaw bringing out the horses," said Caleb, after a glance
through the window, "as if there werena men eneugh in the castle, or as
if I couldna serve the turn of ony o' them that are out o' the gate."

"Alas! Caleb, we should want little if your ability were equal to your
will," replied the Master.

"And I hope your lordship disna want that muckle," said Caleb; "for,
considering a' things, I trust we support the credit of the family as
weel as things will permit of,--only Bucklaw is aye sae frank and sae
forward. And there he has brought out your lordship's palfrey, without
the saddle being decored wi' the broidered sumpter-cloth! and I could
have brushed it in a minute."

"It is all very well," said his master, escaping from him and descending
the narrow and steep winding staircase which led to the courtyard.

"It MAY be a' very weel," said Caleb, somewhat peevishly; "but if your
lordship wad tarry a bit, I will tell you what will NOT be very weel."

"And what is that?" said Ravenswood, impatiently, but stopping at the
same time.

"Why, just that ye suld speer ony gentleman hame to dinner; for I canna
mak anither fast on a feast day, as when I cam ower Bucklaw wi' Queen
Margaret; and, to speak truth, if your lordship wad but please to cast
yoursell in the way of dining wi' Lord Bittlebrains, I'se warrand I wad
cast about brawly for the morn; or if, stead o' that, ye wad but dine
wi' them at the change-house, ye might mak your shift for the awing: ye
might say ye had forgot your purse, or that the carline awed ye rent,
and that ye wad allow it in the settlement."

"Or any other lie that cam uppermost, I suppose?" said his master.
"Good-bye, Caleb; I commend your care for the honour of the family."
And, throwing himself on his horse, he followed Bucklaw, who, at the
manifest risk of his neck, had begun to gallop down the steep path which
led from the Tower as soon as he saw Ravenswood have his foot in the
stirrup.

Caleb Balderstone looked anxiously after them, and shook his thin grey
locks: "And I trust they will come to no evil; but they have reached
the plain, and folk cannot say but that the horse are hearty and in
spirits." Animated by the natural impetuosity and fire of his temper,
young Bucklaw rushed on with the careless speed of a whirlwind.
Ravenswood was scarce more moderate in his pace, for his was a mind
unwillingly roused from contemplative inactivity, but which, when once
put into motion, acquired a spirit of forcible and violent progression.
Neither was his eagerness proportioned in all cases to the motive of
impulse, but might be compared to the sped of a stone, which rushes with
like fury down the hill whether it was first put in motion by the arm of
a giant or the hand of a boy. He felt, therefore, in no ordinary degree,
the headlong impulse of the chase, a pastime so natural to youth of
all ranks, that it seems rather to be an inherent passion in our animal
nature, which levels all differences of rank and education, than an
acquired habit of rapid exercise.

The repeated bursts of the French horn, which was then always used for
the encouragement and direction of the hounds; the deep, though distant
baying of the pack; the half-heard cries of the huntsmen; the half-seen
forms which were discovered, now emerging from glens which crossed the
moor, now sweeping over its surface, now picking their way where it
was impeded by morasses; and, above all, the feeling of his own rapid
motion, animated the Master of Ravenswood, at last for the moment, above
the recollections of a more painful nature by which he was surrounded.
The first thing which recalled him to those unpleasing circumstances
was feeling that his horse, notwithstanding all the advantages which he
received from his rider's knowledge of the country, was unable to keep
up with the chase. As he drew his bridle up with the bitter feeling
that his poverty excluded him from the favourite recreation of his
forefathers, and indeed their sole employment when not engaged in
military pursuits, he was accosted by a well-mounted stranger, who,
unobserved, had kept near him during the earlier part of his career.

"Your horse is blown," said the man, with a complaisance seldom used in
a hunting-field. "Might I crave your honour to make use of mine?"

"Sir," said Ravenswood, more surprised than pleased at such a proposal.
"I really do not know how I have merited such a favour at a stranger's
hands."

"Never ask a question about it, Master," said Bucklaw, who, with great
unwillingness, had hitherto reined in his own gallant steed, not to
outride his host and entertainer. "Take the goods the gods provide you,
as the great John Dryden says; or stay--here, my friend, lend me that
horse; I see you have been puzzled to rein him up this half-hour. I'll
take the devil out of him for you. Now, Master, do you ride mine, which
will carry you like an eagle."

And throwing the rein of his own horse to the Master of Ravenswood, he
sprung upon that which the stranger resigned to him, and continued
his career at full speed. "Was ever so thoughtless a being!" said the
Master; "and you, my friend, how could you trust him with your horse?"

"The horse," said the man, "belongs to a person who will make your
honour, or any of your honourable friends, most welcome to him, flesh
and fell."

"And the owner's name is----?" asked Ravenswood.

"Your honour must excuse me, you will learn that from himself. If you
please to take your friend's horse, and leave me your galloway, I will
meet you after the fall of the stag, for I hear they are blowing him at
bay."

"I believe, my friend, it will be the best way to recover your good
horse for you," answered Ravenswood; and mounting the nag of his friend
Bucklaw, he made all the haste in his power to the spot where the blast
of the horn announced that the stag's career was nearly terminated.

These jovial sounds were intermixed with the huntsmen's shouts of "Hyke
a Talbot! Hyke a Teviot! now, boys, now!" and similar cheering halloos
of the olden hunting-field, to which the impatient yelling of the
hounds, now close of the object of their pursuit, gave a lively and
unremitting chorus. The straggling riders began now to rally towards the
scene of action, collecting from different points as to a common centre.

Bucklaw kept the start which he had gotten, and arrived first at the
spot, where the stag, incapable of sustaining a more prolonged flight,
had turned upon the hounds, and, in the hunter's phrase, was at bay.
With his stately head bent down, his sides white with foam, his eyes
strained betwixt rage and terror, the hunted animal had now in his turn
become an object of intimidation to his pursuers. The hunters came
up one by one, and watched an opportunity to assail him with some
advantage, which, in such circumstances, can only be done with caution.
The dogs stood aloof and bayed loudly, intimating at once eagerness and
fear, and each of the sportsmen seemed to expect that his comrade would
take upon him the perilous task of assaulting and disabling the animal.
The ground, which was a hollow in the common or moor, afforded little
advantage for approaching the stag unobserved; and general was the shout
of triumph when Bucklaw, with the dexterity proper to an accomplished
cavalier of the day, sprang from his horse, and dashing suddenly and
swiftly at the stag, brought him to the ground by a cut on the hind leg
with his short hunting-sword. The pack, rushing in upon their disabled
enemy, soon ended his painful struggles, and solemnised his fall with
their clamour; the hunters, with their horns and voices, whooping and
blowing a mort, or death-note, which resounded far over the billows of
the adjacent ocean.

The huntsman then withdrew the hounds from the throttled stag, and on
his knee presented his knife to a fair female form, on a white palfrey,
whose terror, or perhaps her compassion, had till then kept her at some
distance. She wore a black silk riding-mask, which was then a common
fashion, as well for preserving the complexion from the sun and rain, as
from an idea of decorum, which did not permit a lady to appear barefaced
while engaged in a boisterous sport, and attended by a promiscuous
company. The richness of her dress, however, as well as the mettle and
form of her palfrey, together with the silvan compliment paid to her by
the huntsman, pointed her out to Bucklaw as the principal person in
the field. It was not without a feeling of pity, approaching even
to contempt, that this enthusiastic hunter observed her refuse the
huntsman's knife, presented to her for the purpose of making the first
incision in the stag's breast, and thereby discovering the venison. He
felt more than half inclined to pay his compliments to her; but it had
been Bucklaw's misfortune, that his habits of life had not rendered
him familiarly acquainted with the higher and better classes of female
society, so that, with all his natural audacity, he felt sheepish and
bashful when it became necessary to address a lady of distinction.

Taking unto himself heart of grace (to use his own phrase), he did at
length summon up resolution enough to give the fair huntress good time
of the day, and trust that her sport had answered her expectation. Her
answer was very courteously and modestly expressed, and testified some
gratitude to the gallant cavalier, whose exploit had terminated the
chase so adroitly, when the hounds and huntsmen seemed somewhat at a
stand.

"Uds daggers and scabbard, madam," said Bucklaw, whom this observation
brought at once upon his own ground, "there is no difficulty or merit in
that matter at all, so that a fellow is not too much afraid of having a
pair of antlers in his guts. I have hunted at force five hundred times,
madam; and I never yet saw the stag at bay, by land or water, but I
durst have gone roundly in on him. It is all use and wont, madam; and
I'll tell you, madam, for all that, it must be done with good heed and
caution; and you will do well, madam, to have your hunting-sword right
sharp and double-edged, that you may strike either fore-handed or
back-handed, as you see reason, for a hurt with a buck's horn is a
perilous ad somewhat venomous matter."

"I am afraid, sir," said the young lady, and her smile was scarce
concealed by her vizard, "I shall have little use for such careful
preparation."

"But the gentleman says very right for all that, my lady," said an
old huntsman, who had listened to Bucklaw's harangue with no small
edification; "and I have heard my father say, who was a forester at the
Cabrach, that a wild boar's gaunch is more easily healed than a hurt
from the deer's horn, for so says the old woodman's rhyme--

     If thou be hurt with horn of hart, it brings thee to they bier;
     But tusk of boar shall leeches heal, thereof have lesser fear."

"An I might advise," continued Bucklaw, who was now in his element, and
desirous of assuming the whole management, "as the hounds are surbated
and weary, the head of the stag should be cabaged in order to reward
them; and if I may presume to speak, the huntsman, who is to break up
the stag, ought to drink to your good ladyship's health a good lusty
bicker of ale, or a tass of brandy; for if he breaks him up without
drinking, the venison will not keep well."

This very agreeable prescription received, as will be readily believed,
all acceptation from the huntsman, who, in requital, offered to bucklaw
the compliment of his knife, which the young lady had declined.

This polite proffer was seconded by his mistress. "I believe, sir," she
said, withdrawing herself from the circle, "that my father, for whose
amusement Lord Bittlebrain's hounds have been out to-day, will readily
surrender all care of these matters to a gentleman of your experience."

Then, bending gracefully from her horse, she wished him good morning,
and, attended by one or two domestics, who seemed immediately attached
to her service, retired from the scene of action, to which Bucklaw, too
much delighted with an opportunity of displaying his woodcraft to care
about man or woman either, paid little attention; but was soon stript to
his doublet, with tucked-up sleeves, and naked arms up to the elbows
in blood and grease, slashing, cutting, hacking, and hewing, with the
precision of Sir Tristrem himself, and wrangling and disputing with all
around him concerning nombles, briskets, flankards, and raven-bones,
then usual terms of the art of hunting, or of butchery, whichever the
reader chooses to call it, which are now probably antiquated.

When Ravenswood, who followed a short pace behind his friend, saw that
the stag had fallen, his temporary ardour for the chase gave way to that
feeling of reluctance which he endured at encountering in his fallen
fortunes the gaze whether of equals or inferiors. He reined up his horse
on the top of a gentle eminence, from which he observed the busy and gay
scene beneath him, and heard the whoops of the huntsmen, gaily mingled
with the cry of the dogs, and the neighing and trampling of the horses.
But these jovial sounds fell sadly on the ear of the ruined nobleman.
The chase, with all its train of excitations, has ever since feudal
times been accounted the almost exclusive privilege of the aristocracy,
and was anciently their chief employment in times of peace. The sense
that he was excluded by his situation from enjoying the silvan sport,
which his rank assigned to him as a special prerogative, and the feeling
that new men were now exercising it over the downs which had been
jealously reserved by his ancestors for their own amusement, while he,
the heir of the domain, was fain to hold himself at a distance from
their party, awakened reflections calculated to depress deeply a mind
like Ravenswood's, which was naturally contemplative and melancholy. His
pride, however, soon shook off this feeling of dejection, and it gave
way to impatience upon finding that his volatile friend Bucklaw seemed
in no hurry to return with his borrowed steed, which Ravenswood, before
leaving the field, wished to see restored to the obliging owner. As he
was about to move towards the group of assembled huntsmen, he was joined
by a horseman, who, like himself, had kept aloof during the fall of the
deer.

This personage seemed stricken in years. He wore a scarlet cloak,
buttoning high upon his face, and his hat was unlooped and slouched,
probably by way of defence against the weather. His horse, a strong and
steady palfrey, was calculated for a rider who proposed to witness the
sport of the day rather than to share it. An attendant waited at some
distance, and the whole equipment was that of an elderly gentleman of
rank and fashion. He accosted Ravenswood very politely, but not without
some embarrassment.

"You seem a gallant young gentleman, sir," he said, "and yet appear as
indifferent to this brave sport as if you had my load of years on your
shoulders."

"I have followed the sport with more spirit on other occasions," replied
the Master; "at present, late events in my family must be my apology;
and besides," he added, "I was but indifferently mounted at the
beginning of the sport."

"I think," said the stranger, "one of my attendants had the sense to
accommodate your friend with a horse."

"I was much indebted to his politeness and yours," replied Ravenswood.
"My friend is Mr. Hayston of Bucklaw, whom I dare say you will be
sure to find in the thick of the keenest sportsmen. He will return
your servant's horse, and take my pony in exchange; and will add,"
he concluded, turning his horse's head from the stranger, "his best
acknowledgments to mine for the accommodation."

The Master of Ravenswood, having thus expressed himself, began to move
homeward, with the manner of one who has taken leave of his company.
But the stranger was not so to be shaken off. He turned his horse at the
same time, and rode in the same direction, so near to the Master that,
without outriding him, which the formal civility of the time, and
the respect due to the stranger's age and recent civility, would have
rendered improper, he could not easily escape from his company.

The stranger did not long remain silent. "This, then," he said, "is the
ancient Castle of Wolf's Crag, often mentioned in the Scottish records,"
looking to the old tower, then darkening under the influence of a stormy
cloud, that formed its background; for at the distance of a short mile,
the chase, having been circuitous, had brought the hunters nearly back
to the point which they had attained when Ravenswood and Bucklaw had set
forward to join them.

Ravenswood answered this observation with a cold and distant assent.
"It was, as I have heard," continued the stranger, unabashed by his
coldness, "one of the most early possessions of the honourable family of
Ravenswood."

"Their earliest possession," answered the Master, "and probably their
latest."

"I--I--I should hope not, sir," answered the stranger, clearing his
voice with more than one cough, and making an effort to overcome a
certain degree of hesitation; "Scotland knows what she owes to
this ancient family, and remembers their frequent and honourable
achievements. I have little doubt that, were it properly represented
to her Majesty that so ancient and noble a family were subjected to
dilapidation--I mean to decay--means might be found, ad re-aedificandum
antiquam domum----"

"I will save you the trouble, sir, of discussing this point farther,"
interrupted the Master, haughtily. "I am the heir of that unfortunate
house--I am the Master of Ravenswood. And you, sir, who seem to be
a gentleman of fashion and education, must be sensible that the next
mortification after being unhappy is the being loaded with undesired
commiseration."

"I beg your pardon, sir," said the elder horseman; "I did not know--I am
sensible I ought not to have mentioned--nothing could be farther from my
thoughts than to suppose----"

"There are no apologies necessary, sir," answered Ravenswood, "for here,
I suppose, our roads separate, and I assure you that we part in perfect
equanimity on my side."

As speaking these words, he directed his horse's head towards a narrow
causeway, the ancient approach to Wolf's Crag, of which it might be
truly said, in the words of the Bard of Hope, that

     Frequented by few was the grass-cover'd road,
     Where the hunter of deer and the warrior trode,
     To his hills that encircle the sea.

But, ere he could disengage himself from his companion, the young lady
we have already mentioned came up to join the stranger, followed by her
servants.

"Daughter," said the stranger to the unmasked damsel, "this is the
Master of Ravenswood."

It would have been natural that the gentleman should have replied to
this introduction; but there was something in the graceful form and
retiring modesty of the female to whom he was thus presented, which not
only prevented him from inquiring to whom, and by whom, the annunciation
had been made, but which even for the time struck him absolutely mute.
At this moment the cloud which had long lowered above the height on
which Wolf's Crag is situated, and which now, as it advanced, spread
itself in darker and denser folds both over land and sea, hiding the
distant objects and obscuring those which were nearer, turning the sea
to a leaden complexion and the heath to a darker brown, began now, by
one or two distant peals, to announce the thunders with which it was
fraught; while two flashes of lightning, following each other very
closely, showed in the distance the grey turrets of Wolf's Crag, and,
more nearly, the rollowing billows of the ocean, crested suddenly with
red and dazzling light.

The horse of the fair huntress showed symptoms of impatience and
restiveness, and it became impossible for Ravenswood, as a man or a
gentleman, to leave her abruptly to the case of an aged father or her
menial attendants. He was, or believed himself, obliged in courtesy to
take hold of her bridle, and assist her in managing the unruly animal.
While he was thus engaged, the old gentleman observed that the storm
seemed to increase; that they were far from Lord Bittlebrains's, whose
guests they were for the present; and that he would be obliged to the
Master of Ravenswood to point him the way to the nearest place of refuge
from the storm. At the same time he cast a wistful and embarrassed
look towards the Tower of Wolf's Crag, which seemed to render it almost
impossible for the owner to avoid offering an old man and a lady, in
such an emergency, the temporary use of his house. Indeed, the condition
of the young huntress made this courtesy indispensable; for, in the
course of the services which he rendered, he could not but perceive that
she trembled much, and was extremely agitated, from her apprehensions,
doubtless, of the coming storm.

I know not if the Master of Ravenswood shared her terrors, but he was
not entirely free from something like a similar disorder of nerves, as
he observed, "The Tower of Wolf's Crag has nothing to offer beyond the
shelter of its roof, but if that can be acceptable at such a moment----"
he paused, as if the rest of the invitation stuck in his throat. But
the old gentleman, his self-constituted companion, did not allow him to
recede from the invitation, which he had rather suffered to be implied
than directly expressed.

"The storm," said the stranger, "must be an apology for waiving
ceremony; his daughter's health was weak, she had suffered much from a
recent alarm; he trusted their intrusion on the Master of Ravenswood's
hospitality would not be altogether unpardonable in the circumstances of
the case: his child's safety must be dearer to him than ceremony."

There was no room to retreat. The Master of Ravenswood led the way,
continuing to keep hold of the lady's bridle to prevent her horse
from starting at some unexpected explosion of thunder. He was not so
bewildered in his own hurried reflections but that he remarked, that the
deadly paleness which had occupied her neck and temples, and such of her
features as the riding-mask left exposed, gave place to a deep and rosy
suffusion; and he felt with embarrassment that a flush was by tacit
sympathy excited in his own cheeks. The stranger, with watchfulness
which he disguised under apprehensions of the safety of his daughter,
continued to observe the expression of the Master's countenance as
they ascended the hill to Wolf's Crag. When they stood in front of
that ancient fortress, Ravenswood's emotions were of a very complicated
description; and as he led the way into the rude courtyard, and hallooed
to Caleb to give attendance, there was a tone of sternness, almost of
fierceness, which seemed somewhat alien from the courtesies of one who
is receiving honoured guests.

Caleb came; and not the paleness of the fair stranger at the first
approach of the thunder, nor the paleness of any other person, in any
other circumstances whatever, equalled that which overcame the thin
cheeks of the disconsolate seneschal when he beheld this accession
of guests to the castle, and reflected that the dinner hour was fast
approaching. "Is he daft?" he muttered to himself;--"is he clean daft
a'thegither, to bring lords and leddies, and a host of folk behint them,
and twal o'clock chappit?" Then approaching the Master, he craved pardon
for having permitted the rest of his people to go out to see the hunt,
observing, that "They wad never think of his lordship coming back till
mirk night, and that he dreaded they might play the truant."

"Silence, Balderstone!" said Ravenswood, sternly; "your folly is
unseasonable. Sir and madam," he said, turning to his guests, "this old
man, and a yet older and more imbecile female domestic, form my whole
retinue. Our means of refreshing you are more scanty than even so
miserable a retinue, and a dwelling so dilapidated, might seem to
promise you; but, such as they may chance to be, you may command them."

The elder stranger, struck with the ruined and even savage appearance of
the Tower, rendered still more disconsolate by the lowering and gloomy
sky, and perhaps not altogether unmoved by the grave and determined
voice in which their host addressed them, looked round him anxiously, as
if he half repented the readiness with which he had accepted the offered
hospitality. But there was now no opportunity of receding from the
situation in which he had placed himself.

As for Caleb, he was so utterly stunned by his master's public and
unqualified acknowledgment of the nakedness of the land, that for two
minutes he could only mutter within his hebdomadal beard, which had not
felt the razor for six days, "He's daft--clean daft--red wud, and awa'
wit! But deil hae Caleb Balderstone," said he, collecting his powers of
invention and resource, "if the family shall lose credit, if he were as
mad as the seven wise masters!" He then boldly advanced, and in spite
of his master's frowns and impatience, gravely asked, "If he should
not serve up some slight refection for the young leddy, and a glass of
tokay, or old sack--or----"

"Truce to this ill-timed foolery," said the Master, sternly; "put the
horses into the stable, and interrupt us no more with your absurdities."

"Your honour's pleasure is to be obeyed aboon a' things," said Caleb;
"nevertheless, as for the sack and tokay which it is not your noble
guests' pleasure to accept----"

But here the voice of Bucklaw, heard even above the clattering of
hoofs and braying of horns with which it mingled, announced that he was
scaling the pathway to the Tower at the head of the greater part of the
gallant hunting train.

"The deil be in me," said Caleb, taking heart in spite of this new
invasion of Philistines, "if they shall beat me yet! The hellicat
ne'er-do-weel! to bring such a crew here, that will expect to find
brandy as plenty as ditch-water, and he kenning sae absolutely the case
in whilk we stand for the present! But I trow, could I get rid of thae
gaping gowks of flunkies that hae won into the courtyard at the back
of their betters, as mony a man gets preferment, I could make a' right
yet."

The measures which he took to execute this dauntless resolution, the
reader shall learn in the next chapter.




CHAPTER X.

     With throat unslaked, with black lips baked,
     Agape they heard him call;
     Gramercy they for joy did grin,
     And all at once their breath drew in,
     As they had been drinking all!

     COLERIDGE'S Rime of the Ancient Mariner.

HAYSTON of Bucklaw was one of the thoughtless class who never hesitate
between their friend and their jest. When it was announced that the
principal persons of the chase had taken their route towards Wolf's
Crag, the huntsmen, as a point of civility, offered to transfer the
venison to that mansion; a proffer which was readily accepted by
Bucklaw, who thought much of the astonishment which their arrival in
full body would occasion poor old Caleb Balderstone, and very little of
the dilemma to which he was about to expose his friend the Master, so
ill circumstanced to receive such a party. But in old Caleb he had to
do with a crafty and alert antagonist, prompt at supplying, upon all
emergencies, evasions and excuses suitable, as he thought, to the
dignity of the family.

"Praise be blest!" said Caleb to himself, "ae leaf of the muckle gate
has been swung to wi' yestreen's wind, and I think I can manage to shut
the ither."

But he was desirous, like a prudent governor, at the same time to get
rid, if possible, of the internal enemy, in which light he considered
almost every one who eat and drank, ere he took measures to exclude
those whom their jocund noise now pronounced to be near at hand. He
waited, therefore, with impatience until his master had shown his two
principal guests into the Tower, and then commenced his operations.

"I think," he said to the stranger menials, "that, as they are bringing
the stag's head to the castle in all honour, we, who are indwellers,
should receive them at the gate."

The unwary grooms had no sooner hurried out, in compliance with this
insidious hint, than, one folding-door of the ancient gate being already
closed by the wind, as has been already intimated, honest Caleb lost
no time in shutting the other with a clang, which resounded from
donjon-vault to battlement. Having thus secured the pass, he forthwith
indulged the excluded huntsmen in brief parley, from a small projecting
window, or shot-hole, through which, in former days, the warders were
wont to reconnoitre those who presented themselves before the gates. He
gave them to understand, in a short and pity speech, that the gate of
the castle was never on any account opened during meal-times; that his
honour, the Master of Ravenswood, and some guests of quality, had
just sat down to dinner; that there was excellent brandy at the
hostler-wife's at Wolf's Hope down below; and he held out some obscure
hint that the reckoning would be discharged by the Master; but this was
uttered in a very dubious and oracular strain, for, like Louis XIV.,
Caleb Balderstone hesitated to carry finesse so far as direct falsehood,
and was content to deceive, if possible, without directly lying.

This annunciation was received with surprise by some, with laughter
by others, and with dismay by the expelled lackeys, who endeavoured to
demonstrate that their right of readmission, for the purpose of waiting
upon their master and mistress, was at least indisputable. But Caleb was
not in a humour to understand or admit any distinctions. He stuck to his
original proposition with that dogged but convenient pertinacity which
is armed against all conviction, and deaf to all reasoning. Bucklaw now
came from the rear of the party, and demanded admittance in a very angry
tone. But the resolution of Caleb was immovable.

"If the king on the throne were at the gate," he declared, "his ten
fingers should never open it contrair to the established use and wont of
the family of Ravenswood, and his duty as their head-servant."

Bucklaw was now extremely incensed, and with more oaths and curses
than we care to repeat, declared himself most unworthily treated, and
demanded peremptorily to speak with the Master of Ravenswood himself.

But to this also Caleb turned a deaf ear. "He's as soon a-bleeze as a
tap of tow, the lad Bucklaw," he said; "but the deil of ony master's
face he shall see till he has sleepit and waken'd on't. He'll ken
himsell better the morn's morning. It sets the like o' him, to be
bringing a crew of drunken hunters here, when he kens there is but
little preparation to sloken his ain drought." And he disappeared from
the window, leaving them all to digest their exclusion as they best
might.

But another person, of whose presence Caleb, in the animation of the
debate, was not aware, had listened in silence to its progress. This
was the principal domestic of the stranger--a man of trust and
consequence--the same who, in the hunting-field, had accommodated
Bucklaw with the use of his horse. He was in the stable when Caleb had
contrived the expulsion of his fellow-servants, and thus avoided sharing
the same fate, from which his personal importance would certainly not
have otherwise saved him.

This personage perceived the manoeuvre of Caleb, easily appreciated the
motive of his conduct, and knowing his master's intentions towards the
family of Ravenswood, had no difficulty as to the line of conduct he
ought to adopt. He took the place of Caleb (unperceived by the latter)
at the post of audience which he had just left, and announced to the
assembled domestics, "That it was his master's pleasure that Lord
Bittlebrain's retinue and his own should go down to the adjacent
change-house and call for what refreshments they might have occasion
for, and he should take care to discharge the lawing."

The jolly troop of huntsmen retired from the inhospitable gate of Wolf's
Crag, execrating, as they descended the steep pathway, the niggard and
unworthy disposition of the proprietor, and damning, with more than
silvan license, both the castle and its inhabitants. Bucklaw, with many
qualities which would have made him a man of worth and judgment in more
favourable circumstances, had been so utterly neglected in point of
education, that he was apt to think and feel according to the ideas of
the companions of his pleasures. The praises which had recently been
heaped upon himself he contrasted with the general abuse now levelled
against Ravenswood; he recalled to his mind the dull and monotonous days
he had spent in the Tower of Wolf's Crag, compared with the joviality
of his usual life; he felt with great indignation his exclusion from
the castle, which he considered as a gross affront, and every mingled
feeling led him to break off the union which he had formed with the
Master of Ravenswood.

On arriving at the change-house of the village of Wolf's Hope, he
unexpectedly met with an acquaintance just alighting from his horse.
This was no other than the very respectable Captain Craigengelt,
who immediately came up to him, and, without appearing to retain any
recollection of the indifferent terms on which they had parted, shook
him by the hand in the warmest manner possible. A warm grasp of the
hand was what Bucklaw could never help returning with cordiality, and no
sooner had Craigengelt felt the pressure of his fingers than he knew the
terms on which he stood with him.

"Long life to you, Bucklaw!" he exclaimed; "there's life for honest folk
in this bad world yet!"

The Jacobites at this period, with what propriety I know not, used, it
must be noticed, the term of HONEST MEN as peculiarly descriptive of
their own party.

"Ay, and for others besides, it seems," answered Bucklaw; "otherways,
how came you to venture hither, noble Captain?"

"Who--I? I am as free as the wind at Martinmas, that pays neither
land-rent nor annual; all is explained--all settled with the honest old
drivellers yonder of Auld Reekie. Pooh! pooh! they dared not keep me a
week of days in durance. A certain person has better friends among them
than you wot of, and can serve a friend when it is least likely."

"Pshaw!" answered Hayston, who perfectly knew and thoroughly despised
the character of this man, "none of your cogging gibberish; tell me
truly, are you at liberty and in safety?"

"Free and safe as a Whig bailie on the causeway of his own borough, or a
canting Presbyterian minister in his own pulpit; and I came to tell you
that you need not remain in hiding any longer."

"Then I suppose you call yourself my friend, Captain Craigengelt?" said
Bucklaw.

"Friend!" replied Craigengelt, "my cock of the pit! why, I am thy very
Achates, man, as I have heard scholars say--hand and glove--bark and
tree--thine to life and death!"

"I'll try that in a moment," answered Bucklaw. "Thou art never without
money, however thou comest by it. Lend me two pieces to wash the dust
out of these honest fellows' throats in the first place, and then----"

"Two pieces! Twenty are at thy service, my lad, and twenty to back
them."

"Ay, say you so?" said Bucklaw, pausing, for his natural penetration led
him to suspect some extraordinary motive lay couched under an excess of
generosity. "Craigengelt, you are either an honest fellow in right good
earnest, and I scarce know how to believe that; or you are cleverer than
I took you for, and I scarce know how to believe that either."

"L'un n'empeche pas l'autre," said Craigengelt. "Touch and try; the gold
is good as ever was weighed."

He put a quantity of gold pieces into Bucklaw's hand, which he thrust
into his pocket without either counting or looking at them, only
observing, "That he was so circumstanced that he must enlist, though
the devil offered the press-money"; and then turning to the huntsmen, he
called out, "Come along, my lads; all is at my cost."

"Long life to Bucklaw!" shouted the men of the chase.

"And confusion to him that takes his share of the sport, and leaves the
hunters as dry as a drumhead," added another, by way of corollary.

"The house of Ravenswood was ance a gude and an honourable house in
this land," said an old man; "but it's lost its credit this day, and the
Master has shown himself no better than a greedy cullion."

And with this conclusion, which was unanimously agreed to by all who
heard it, they rushed tumultuously into the house of entertainment,
where they revelled till a late hour. The jovial temper of Bucklaw
seldom permitted him to be nice in the choice of his associates; and on
the present occasion, when his joyous debauch received additional
zest from the intervention of an unusual space of sobriety, and almost
abstinence, he was as happy in leading the revels as if his comrades had
been sons of princes. Craigengelt had his own purposes in fooling him up
to the top of his bent; and having some low humour, much impudence, and
the power of singing a good song, understanding besides thoroughly the
disposition of his regained associate, he headily succeeded in involving
him bumper-deep in the festivity of the meeting.


A very different scene was in the mean time passing in the Tower of
Wolf's Crag. When the Master of Ravenswood left the courtyard, too
much busied with his own perplexed reflections to pay attention to the
manoeuvre of Caleb, he ushered his guests into the great hall of the
castle.

The indefatigable Balderstone, who, from choice or habit, worked on from
morning to night, had by degrees cleared this desolate apartment of the
confused relics of the funeral banquet, and restored it to some order.
But not all his skill and labour, in disposing to advantage the little
furniture which remained, could remove the dark and disconsolate
appearance of those ancient and disfurnished walls. The narrow windows,
flanked by deep indentures into the walls, seemed formed rather to
exclude than to admit the cheerful light; and the heavy and gloomy
appearance of the thunder-sky added still farther to the obscurity.

As Ravenswood, with the grace of a gallant of that period, but not
without a certain stiffness and embarrassment of manner, handed the
young lady to the upper end of the apartment, her father remained
standing more near to the door, as if about to disengage himself from
his hat and cloak. At this moment the clang of the portal was heard, a
sound at which the stranger started, stepped hastily to the window, and
looked with an air of alarm at Ravenswood, when he saw that the gate of
the court was shut, and his domestics excluded.

"You have nothing to fear, sir," said Ravenswood, gravely; "this roof
retains the means of giving protection, though not welcome. Methinks,"
he added, "it is time that I should know who they are that have thus
highly honoured my ruined dwelling!" The young lady remained silent
and motionless, and the father, to whom the question was more directly
addressed, seemed in the situation of a performer who has ventured to
take upon himself a part which he finds himself unable to present,
and who comes to a pause when it is most to be expected that he should
speak. While he endeavoured to cover his embarrassment with the exterior
ceremonials of a well-bred demeanour, it was obvious that, in making his
bow, one foot shuffled forward, as if to advance, the other backward, as
if with the purpose of escape; and as he undid the cape of his coat, and
raised his beaver from his face, his fingers fumbled as if the one had
been linked with rusted iron, or the other had weighed equal with a
stone of lead. The darkness of the sky seemed to increase, as if to
supply the want of those mufflings which he laid aside with such evident
reluctance. The impatience of Ravenswood increased also in proportion to
the delay of the stranger, and he appeared to struggle under agitation,
though probably from a very different cause. He laboured to restrain his
desire to speak, while the stranger, to all appearance, was at a loss
for words to express what he felt necessary to say.

At length Ravenswood's impatience broke the bounds he had imposed upon
it. "I perceive," he said, "that Sir William Ashton is unwilling to
announced himself in the Castle of Wolf's Crag."

"I had hoped it was unnecessary," said the Lord Keeper, relieved from
his silence, as a spectre by the voice of the exorcist, "and I am
obliged to you, Master of Ravenswood, for breaking the ice at once,
where circumstances--unhappy circumstances, let me call them--rendered
self-introduction peculiarly awkward."

"And I am not then," said the Master of Ravenswood, gravely, "to
consider the honour of this visit as purely accidental?"

"Let us distinguish a little," said the Keeper, assuming an appearance
of ease which perhaps his heart was a stranger to; "this is an honour
which I have eagerly desired for some time, but which I might never
have obtained, save for the accident of the storm. My daughter and I are
alike grateful for this opportunity of thanking the brave man to whom
she owes her life and I mine."

The hatred which divided the great families in the feudal times had lost
little of its bitterness, though it no longer expressed itself in
deeds of open violence. Not the feelings which Ravenswood had begun to
entertain towards Lucy Ashton, not the hospitality due to his guests,
were able entirely to subdue, though they warmly combated, the deep
passions which arose within him at beholding his father's foe standing
in the hall of the family of which he had in a great measure accelerated
the ruin. His looks glanced from the father to the daughter with an
irresolution of which Sir William Ashton did not think it proper
to await the conclusion. He had now disembarrassed himself of his
riding-dress, and walking up to his daughter, he undid the fastening of
her mask.

"Lucy, my love," he said, raising her and leading her towards
Ravenswood, "lay aside your mask, and let us express our gratitude to
the Master openly and barefaced."

"If he will condescend to accept it," was all that Lucy uttered; but in
a tone so sweetly modulated, and which seemed to imply at once a feeling
and a forgiving of the cold reception to which they were exposed,
that, coming from a creature so innocent and so beautiful, her words cut
Ravenswood to the very heart for his harshness. He muttered something
of surprise, something of confusion, and, ending with a warm and eager
expression of his happiness at being able to afford her shelter under
his roof, he saluted her, as the ceremonial of the time enjoined upon
such occasions. Their cheeks had touched and were withdrawn from each
other; Ravenswood had not quitted the hand which he had taken in kindly
courtesy; a blush, which attached more consequence by far than was usual
to such ceremony, still mantled on Lucy Ashton's beautiful cheek, when
the apartment was suddenly illuminated by a flash of lightning, which
seemed absolutely to swallow the darkness of the hall. Every object
might have been for an instant seen distinctly. The slight and
half-sinking form of Lucy Ashton; the well-proportioned and stately
figure of Ravenswood, his dark features, and the fiery yet irresolute
expression of his eyes; the old arms and scutcheons which hung on the
walls of the apartment, were for an instant distinctly visible to the
Keeper by a strong red brilliant glare of light. Its disappearance was
almost instantly followed by a burst of thunder, for the storm-cloud was
very near the castle; and the peal was so sudden and dreadful, that the
old tower rocked to its foundation, and every inmate concluded it was
falling upon them. The soot, which had not been disturbed for centuries,
showered down the huge tunnelled chimneys; lime and dust flew in clouds
from the wall; and, whether the lightning had actually struck the castle
or whether through the violent concussion of the air, several heavy
stones were hurled from the mouldering battlements into the roaring
sea beneath. It might seem as if the ancient founder of the castle were
bestriding the thunderstorm, and proclaiming his displeasure at the
reconciliation of his descendant with the enemy of his house.

The consternation was general, and it required the efforts of both the
Lord Keeper and Ravenswood to keep Lucy from fainting. Thus was the
Master a second time engaged in the most delicate and dangerous of
all tasks, that of affording support and assistance to a beautiful and
helpless being, who, as seen before in a similar situation, had
already become a favourite of his imagination, both when awake and when
slumbering. If the genius of the house really condemned a union betwixt
the Master and his fair guest, the means by which he expressed his
sentiments were as unhappily chosen as if he had been a mere mortal.
The train of little attentions, absolutely necessary to soothe the young
lady's mind, and aid her in composing her spirits, necessarily threw
the Master of Ravenswood into such an intercourse with her father as was
calculated, for the moment at least, to break down the barrier of feudal
enmity which divided them. To express himself churlishly, or even
coldly, towards an old man whose daughter (and SUCH a daughter) lay
before them, overpowered with natural terror--and all this under his own
roof, the thing was impossible; and by the time that Lucy, extending a
hand to each, was able to thank them for their kindness, the Master
felt that his sentiments of hostility towards the Lord Keeper were by no
means those most predominant in his bosom.

The weather, her state of health, the absence of her attendants,
all prevented the possibility of Lucy Ashton renewing her journey to
Bittlebrains House, which was full five miles distant; and the Master of
Ravenswood could not but, in common courtesy, offer the shelter of his
roof for the rest of the day and for the night. But a flush of less
soft expression, a look much more habitual to his features, resumed
predominance when he mentioned how meanly he was provided for the
entertainment of his guests.

"Do not mention deficiencies," said the Lord Keeper, eager to interrupt
him and prevent his resuming an alarming topic; "you are preparing to
set out for the Continent, and your house is probably for the present
unfurnished. All this we understand; but if you mention inconvenience,
you will oblige us to seek accommodations in the hamlet."

As the Master of Ravenswood was about to reply, the door of the hall
opened, and Caleb Balderstone rushed in.




CHAPTER XI.

     Let them have meat enough, woman--half a hen;
     There be old rotten pilchards--put them off too;
     'Tis but a little new anointing of them,
     And a strong onion, that confounds the savour.

     Love's Pilgrimage.

THE thunderbolt, which had stunned all who were within hearing of it,
had only served to awaken the bold and inventive genius of the flower of
majors-domo. Almost before the clatter had ceased, and while there was
yet scarce an assurance whether the castle was standing or falling,
Caleb exclaimed, "Heaven be praised! this comes to hand like the boul of
a pint-stoup." He then barred the kitchen door in the face of the Lord
Keeper's servant, whom he perceived returning from the party at the
gate, and muttering, "How the deil cam he in?--but deil may care. Mysie,
what are ye sitting shaking and greeting in the chimney-neuk for? Come
here--or stay where ye are, and skirl as loud as ye can; it's a' ye're
gude for. I say, ye auld deevil, skirl--skirl--louder--louder, woman;
gar the gentles hear ye in the ha'. I have heard ye as far off as the
Bass for a less matter. And stay--down wi' that crockery----"

And with a sweeping blow, he threw down from a shelf some articles of
pewter and earthenware. He exalted his voice amid the clatter, shouting
and roaring in a manner which changed Mysie's hysterical terrors of the
thunder into fears that her old fellow-servant was gone distracted. "He
has dung down a' the bits o' pigs, too--the only thing we had left
to haud a soup milk--and he has spilt the hatted hit that was for the
Master's dinner. Mercy save us, the auld man's gaen clean and clear wud
wi' the thunner!"

"Haud your tongue, ye b----!" said Caleb, in the impetuous and
overbearing triumph of successful invention, "a's provided now--dinner
and a'thing; the thunner's done a' in a clap of a hand!"

"Puir man, he's muckle astray," said Mysie, looking at him with a
mixture of pity and alarm; "I wish he may ever come hame to himsell
again."

"Here, ye auld doited deevil," said Caleb, still exulting
in his extrication from a dilemma which had seemed insurmountable;
"keep the strange man out of the kitchen; swear the thunner
came down the chimney and spoiled the best dinner ye ever
dressed--beef--bacon--kid--lark--leveret--wild-fowl--venison, and what
not. Lay it on thick, and never mind expenses. I'll awa' up to the
la'. Make a' the confusion ye can; but be sure ye keep out the strange
servant."

With these charges to his ally, Caleb posted up to the hall, but
stopping to reconnoitre through an aperture, which time, for the
convenience of many a domestic in succession, had made in the door, and
perceiving the situation of Miss Ashton, he had prudence enough to
make a pause, both to avoid adding to her alarm and in order to secure
attention to his account of the disastrous effects of the thunder.

But when he perceived that the lady was recovered, and heard the
conversation turn upon the accommodation and refreshment which the
castle afforded, he thought it time to burst into the room in the manner
announced in the last chapter.

"Willawins!--willawins! Such a misfortune to befa' the house of
Ravenswood, and I to live to see it."

"What is the matter, Caleb?" said his master, somewhat alarmed in his
turn; "has any part of the castle fallen?"

"Castle fa'an! na, but the sute's fa'an, and the thunner's come right
down the kitchen-lum, and the things are a' lying here awa', there awa',
like the Laird o' Hotchpotch's lands; and wi' brave guests of honour
and quality to entertain (a low bow here to Sir William Ashton and his
daughter), and naething left in the house fit to present for dinner, or
for supper either, for aught that I can see!"

"I very believe you, Caleb," said Ravenswood, drily. Balderstone here
turned to his master a half-upbraiding, half-imploring countenance,
and edged towards him as he repeated, "It was nae great matter of
preparation; but just something added to your honour's ordinary course
of fare--petty cover, as they say at the Louvre--three courses and the
fruit."

"Keep your intolerable nonsense to yourself, you old fool!" said
Ravenswood, mortified at his officiousness, yet not knowing how to
contradict him, without the risk of giving rise to scenes yet more
ridiculous.

Caleb saw his advantage, and resolved to improve it. But first,
observing that the Lord Keeper's servant entered the apartment and spoke
apart with his master, he took the same opportunity to whisper a few
words into Ravenswood's ear: "Haud your tongue, for heaven's sake, sir;
if it's my pleasure to hazard my soul in telling lees for the honour
of the family, it's nae business o' yours; and if ye let me gang on
quietly, I'se be moderate in my banquet; but if ye contradict me, deil
but I dress ye a dinner fit for a duke!"

Ravenswood, in fact, thought it would be best to let his officious
butler run on, who proceeded to enumerate upon his fingers--"No muckle
provision--might hae served four persons of honour,--first course,
capons in white broth--roast kid--bacon with reverence; second course,
roasted leveret--butter crabs--a veal florentine; third course,
blackcock--it's black eneugh now wi' the sute--plumdamas--a tart--a
flam--and some nonsense sweet things, adn comfits--and that's a',"
he said, seeing the impatience of his master--"that's just a' was
o't--forbye the apples and pears."

Miss Ashton had by degrees gathered her spirits, so far as to pay some
attention to what was going on; and observing the restrained impatience
of Ravenswood, contrasted with the peculiar determination of manner with
which Caleb detailed his imaginary banquet, the whole struck her as so
ridiculous that, despite every effort to the contrary, she burst into a
fit of incontrollable laughter, in which she was joined by her father,
though with more moderation, and finally by the Master of Ravenswood
himself, though conscious that the jest was at his own expense. Their
mirth--for a scene which we read with little emotion often appears
extremely ludicrous to the spectators--made the old vault ring again.
They ceased--they renewed--they ceased--they renewed again their shouts
of laughter! Caleb, in the mean time, stood his ground with a grave,
angry, and scornful dignity, which greatly enhanced the ridicule of the
scene and mirth of the spectators.

At length, when the voices, and nearly the strength, of the laughers
were exhausted, he exclaimed, with very little ceremony: "The deil's in
the gentles! they breakfast sae lordly, that the loss of the best dinner
ever cook pat fingers to makes them as merry as if it were the best
jeest in a' George Buchanan. If there was as little in your honours'
wames as there is in Caleb Balderstone's, less caickling wad serve ye on
sic a gravaminous subject."

Caleb's blunt expression of resentment again awakened the mirth of the
company, which, by the way, he regarded not only as an aggression upon
the dignity of the family, but a special contempt of the eloquence with
which he himself had summed up the extent of their supposed losses. "A
description of a dinner," as he said afterwards to Mysie, "that wad hae
made a fu' man hungry, and them to sit there laughing at it!"

"But," said Miss Ashton, composing her countenance as well as she could,
"are all these delicacies so totally destroyed that no scrap can be
collected?"

"Collected, my leddy! what wad ye collect out of the sute and the ass?
Ye may gang down yoursell, and look into our kitchen--the cookmaid in
the trembling exies--the gude vivers lying a' about--beef, capons, and
white broth--florentine and flams--bacon wi' reverence--and a' the sweet
confections and whim-whams--ye'll see them a', my leddy--that is," said
he, correcting himself, "ye'll no see ony of them now, for the cook
has soopit them up, as was weel her part; but ye'll see the white broth
where it was spilt. I pat my fingers in it, and it tastes as like sour
milk as ony thing else; if that isna the effect of thunner, I kenna what
is. This gentleman here couldna but hear the clash of our haill dishes,
china and silver thegither?"

The Lord Keeper's domestic, though a statesman's attendant, and of
course trained to command his countenance upon all occasions, was
somewhat discomposed by this appeal, to which he only answered by a bow.

"I think, Mr. Butler," said the Lord Keeper, who began to be afraid lest
the prolongation of this scene should at length displease Ravenswood--"I
think that, were you to retire with my servant Lockhard--he has
travelled, and is quite accustomed to accidents and contingencies of
every kind, and I hope betwixt you, you may find out some mode of supply
at this emergency."

"His honour kens," said Caleb, who, however hopeless of himself
of accomplishing what was desirable, would, like the high-spirited
elephant, rather have died in the effort than brooked the aid of a
brother in commission--"his honour kens weel I need nae counsellor, when
the honour of the house is concerned."

"I should be unjust if I denied it, Caleb," said his master; "but your
art lies chiefly in making apologies, upon which we can no more dine
than upon the bill of fare of our thunder-blasted dinner. Now, possibly
Mr. Lockhard's talent may consist in finding some substitute for that
which certainly is not, and has in all probability never been."

"Your honour is pleased to be facetious," said Caleb, "but I am sure
that, for the warst, for a walk as far as Wolf's Hope, I could dine
forty men--no that the folk there deserve your honour's custom. They hae
been ill advised in the matter of the duty eggs and butter, I winna deny
that."

"Do go consult together," said the Master; "go down to the village,
and do the best you can. We must not let our guests remain without
refreshment, to save the honour of a ruined family. And here, Caleb,
take my purse; I believe that will prove your best ally."

"Purse! purse, indeed!" quoth Caleb, indignantly flinging out of the
room; "what suld I do wi' your honour's purse, on your ain grund? I
trust we are no to pay for our ain?"

The servants left the hall; and the door was no sooner shut than the
Lord Keeper began to apologise for the rudeness of his mirth; and Lucy
to hope she had given no pain or offence to the kind-hearted faithful
old man.

"Caleb and I must both learn, madam, to undergo with good humour, or at
least with patience, the ridicule which everywhere attaches itself to
poverty."

"You do yourself injustice, Master of Ravenswood, on my word of honour,"
answered his elder guest. "I believe I know more of your affairs than
you do yourself, and I hope to show you that I am interested in them;
and that--in short, that your prospects are better than you apprehend.
In the mean time, I can conceive nothing so respectable as the spirit
which rises above misfortune, and prefers honourable privations to debt
or dependence."

Whether from fear of offending the delicacy or awakening the pride of
the Master, the Lord Keeper made these allusions with an appearance
of fearful and hesitating reserve, and seemed to be afraid that he was
intruding too far, in venturing to touch, however lightly, upon such a
topic, even when the Master had led to it. In short, he appeared at once
pushed on by his desire of appearing friendly, and held back by the fear
of intrusion. It was no wonder that the Master of Ravenswood, little
acquainted as he then was with life, should have given this consummate
courtier credit for more sincerity than was probably to be found in
a score of his cast. He answered, however, with reserve, that he was
indebted to all who might think well of him; and, apologising to his
guests, he left the hall, in order to make such arrangements for their
entertainment as circumstances admitted.

Upon consulting with old Mysie, the accommodations for the night were
easily completed, as indeed they admitted of little choice. The Master
surrendered his apartment for the use of Miss Ashton, and Mysie, once a
person of consequence, dressed in a black satin gown which had belonged
of yore to the Master's grandmother, and had figured in the court-balls
of Henrietta Maria, went to attend her as lady's-maid. He next inquired
after Bucklaw, and understanding he was at the change-house with the
huntsmen and some companions, he desired Caleb to call there, and
acquaint him how he was circumstanced at Wolf's Crag; to intimate to him
that it would be most convenient if he could find a bed in the hamlet,
as the elder guest must necessarily be quartered in the secret chamber,
the only spare bedroom which could be made fit to receive him. The
Master saw no hardship in passing the night by the hall fire, wrapt in
his campaign-cloak; and to Scottish domestics of the day, even of the
highest rank, nay, to young men of family or fashion, on any pinch,
clean straw, or a dry hayloft, was always held good night-quarters.

For the rest, Lockhard had his master's orders to bring some venison
from the inn, and Caleb was to trust to his wits for the honour of his
family. The Master, indeed, a second time held out his purse; but, as it
was in sight of the strange servant, the butler thought himself obliged
to decline what his fingers itched to clutch. "Couldna he hae slippit it
gently into my hand?" said Caleb; "but his honour will never learn how
to bear himsell in siccan cases."

Mysie, in the mean time, according to a uniform custom in remote places
in Scotland, offered the strangers the produce of her little dairy,
"while better meat was getting ready." And according to another custom,
not yet wholly in desuetude, as the storm was now drifting off to
leeward, the Master carried the Keeper to the top of his highest
tower to admire a wide and waste extent of view, and to "weary for his
dinner."




CHAPTER XII.

     "Now dame," quoth he, "Je vous dis sans doute,
     Had I nought of a capon but the liver,
     And of your white bread nought but a shiver,
     And after that a roasted pigge's head
     (But I ne wold for me no beast were dead),
     Then had I with you homely sufferaunce."

     CHAUCER, Summer's Tale.

IT was not without some secret misgivings that Caleb set out upon
his exploratory expedition. In fact, it was attended with a treble
difficulty. He dared not tell his mast the offence which he had that
morning given to Bucklaw, just for the honour of the family; he dared
not acknowledge he had been too hasty in refusing the purse; and,
thirdly, he was somewhat apprehensive of unpleasant consequences upon
his meeting Hayston under the impression of an affront, and probably by
this time under the influence also of no small quantity of brandy.

Caleb, to do him justice, was as bold as any lion where the honour of
the family of Ravenswood was concerned; but his was that considerate
valour which does not delight in unnecessary risks. This, however, was a
secondary consideration; the main point was to veil the indigence of
the housekeeping at the castle, and to make good his vaunt of the cheer
which his resources could procure, without Lockhard's assistance, and
without supplies from his master. This was as prime a point of honour
with him as with the generous elephant with whom we have already
compared him, who, being overtasked, broke his skull through the
desperate exertions which he made to discharge his duty, when he
perceived they were bringing up another to his assistance.

The village which they now approached had frequently afforded the
distressed butler resources upon similar emergencies; but his relations
with it had been of late much altered.

It was a little hamlet which straggled along the side of a creek formed
by the discharge of a small brook into the sea, and was hidden from
the castle, to which it had been in former times an appendage, by the
intervention of the shoulder of a hill forming a projecting headland.
It was called Wolf's Hope (i.e. Wolf's Haven), and the few inhabitants
gained a precarious subsistence by manning two or three fishing-boats
in the herring season, and smuggling gin and brandy during the
winter months. They paid a kind of hereditary respect to the Lords
of Ravenswood; but, in the difficulties of the family, most of the
inhabitants of Wolf's Hope had contrived to get feu-rights to their
little possessions, their huts, kail-yards, and rights of commonty, so
that they were emancipated from the chains of feudal dependence,
and free from the various exactions with which, under every possible
pretext, or without any pretext at all, the Scottish landlords of the
period, themselves in great poverty, were wont to harass their still
poorer tenants at will. They might be, on the whole, termed independent,
a circumstance peculiarly galling to Caleb, who had been wont to
exercise over them the same sweeping authority in levying contributions
which was exercised in former times in England, when "the royal
purveyors, sallying forth from under the Gothic portcullis to purchase
provisions with power and prerogative, instead of money, brought home
the plunder of an hundred markets, and all that could be seized from
a flying and hiding country, and deposited their spoil in an hundred
caverns."

Caleb loved the memory and resented the downfall of that authority,
which mimicked, on a petty scale, the grand contributions exacted by
the feudal sovereigns. And as he fondly flattered himself that the awful
rule and right supremacy, which assigned to the Barons of Ravenswood the
first and most effective interest in all productions of nature within
five miles of their castle, only slumbered, and was not departed
for ever, he used every now and then to give the recollection of the
inhabitants a little jog by some petty exaction. These were at first
submitted to, with more or less readiness, by the inhabitants of the
hamlet; for they had been so long used to consider the wants of the
Baron and his family as having a title to be preferred to their own,
that their actual independence did not convey to them an immediate sense
of freedom. They resembled a man that has been long fettered, who,
even at liberty, feels in imagination the grasp of the handcuffs still
binding his wrists. But the exercise of freedom is quickly followed with
the natural consciousness of its immunities, as the enlarged prisoner,
by the free use of his limbs, soon dispels the cramped feeling they had
acquired when bound.

The inhabitants of Wolf's Hope began to grumble, to resist, and at
length positively to refuse compliance with the exactions of Caleb
Balderstone. It was in vain he reminded them, that when the eleventh
Lord Ravenswood, called the Skipper, from his delight in naval matters,
had encouraged the trade of their port by building the pier (a bulwark
of stones rudely piled together), which protected the fishing-boats from
the weather, it had been matter of understanding that he was to have
the first stone of butter after the calving of every cow within the
barony, and the first egg, thence called the Monday's egg, laid by every
hen on every Monday in the year.

The feuars heard and scratched their heads, coughed, sneezed, and being
pressed for answer, rejoined with one voice, "They could not say"--the
universal refuge of a Scottish peasant when pressed to admit a claim
which his conscience owns, or perhaps his feelings, and his interest
inclines him to deny.

Caleb, however, furnished the notables of Wolf's Hope with a note of
the requisition of butter and eggs, which he claimed as arrears of the
aforesaid subsidy, or kindly aid, payable as above mentioned; and having
intimated that he would not be averse to compound the same for goods or
money, if it was inconvenient to them to pay in kind, left them, as he
hoped, to debate the mode of assessing themselves for that purpose.
On the contrary, they met with a determined purpose of resisting the
exaction, and were only undecided as to the mode of grounding
their opposition, when the cooper, a very important person on a
fishing-station, and one of the conscript fathers of the village,
observed, "That their hens had caickled mony a day for the Lords of
Ravenswood, and it was time they suld caickle for those that gave
them roosts and barley." An unanimous grin intimated the assent of the
assembly. "And," continued the orator, "if it's your wull, I'll just tak
a step as far as Dunse for Davie Dingwall, the writer, that's come frae
the North to settle amang us, and he'll pit this job to rights, I'se
warrant him."

A day was accordingly fixed for holding a grand palaver at Wolf's Hope
on the subject of Caleb's requisitions, and he was invited to attend at
the hamlet for that purpose.

He went with open hands and empty stomach, trusting to fill the one on
his master's account and the other on his own score, at the expense of
the feuars of Wolf's Hope. But, death to his hopes! as he entered the
eastern end of the straggling village, the awful form of Davie Dingwall,
a sly, dry, hard-fisted, shrewd country attorney, who had already acted
against the family of Ravenswood, and was a principal agent of Sir
William Ashton, trotted in at the western extremity, bestriding a
leathern portmanteau stuffed with the feu-charters of the hamlet, and
hoping he had not kept Mr. Balderstone waiting, "as he was instructed
and fully empowered to pay or receive, compound or compensate, and,
in fine, to age as accords respecting all mutual and unsettled claims
whatsoever, belonging or competent to the Honourable Edgar Ravenswood,
commonly called the Master of Ravenswood----"

"The RIGHT Honourable Edgar LORD RAVENSWOOD," said Caleb, with great
emphasis; for, though conscious he had little chance of advantage in the
conflict to ensue, he was resolved not to sacrifice one jot of honour.

"Lord Ravenswood, then," said the man of business--"we shall not quarrel
with you about titles of courtesy--commonly called Lord Ravenswood, or
Master of Ravenswood, heritable proprietor of the lands and barony of
Wolf's Crag, on othe ne part, and to John Whitefish and others, feuars
in the town of Wolf's Hope, within the barony aforesaid, on the other
part."

Caleb was conscious, from sad experience, that he would wage a very
different strife with this mercenary champion than with the individual
feuars themselves, upon whose old recollections, predilections,
and habits of thinking he might have wrought by an hundred indirect
arguments, to which their deputy-representative was totally insensible.
The issue of the debate proved the reality of his apprehensions. It was
in vain he strained his eloquence and ingenuity, and collected into one
mass all arguments arising from antique custom and hereditary respect,
from the good deeds done by the Lords of Ravenswood to the community of
Wolf's Hope in former days, and from what might be expected from them in
future. The writer stuck to the contents of his feu-charters; he could
not see it: 'twas not in the bond. And when Caleb, determined to try
what a little spirit would do, deprecated the consequences of Lord
Ravenswood's withdrawing his protection from the burgh, and even hinted
in his using active measures of resentment, the man of law sneered in
his face.

"His clients," he said, "had determined to do the best they could for
their own town, and he thought Lord Ravenswood, since he was a lord,
might have enough to do to look after his own castle. As to any threats
of stouthrief oppression, by rule of thumb, or via facti, as the law
termed it, he would have Mr. Balderstone recollect, that new times were
not as old times; that they lived on the south of the Forth, and far
from the Highlands; that his clients thought they were able to protect
themselves; but should they find themselves mistaken, they would apply
to the government for the protection of a corporal and four red-coats,
who," said Mr. Dingwall, with a grin, "would be perfectly able to secure
them against Lord Ravenswood, and all that he or his followers could do
by the strong hand."

If Caleb could have concentrated all the lightnings of aristocracy in
his eye, to have struck dead this contemner of allegiance and privilege,
he would have launched them at his head, without respect to the
consequences. As it was, he was compelled to turn his course backward
to the castle; and there he remained for full half a day invisible and
inaccessible even to Mysie, sequestered in his own peculiar dungeon,
where he sat burnishing a single pewter plate and whistling "Maggie
Lauder" six hours without intermission.

The issue of this unfortunate requisition had shut against Caleb all
resources which could be derived from Wolf's Hope and its purlieus, the
El Dorado, or Peru, from which, in all former cases of exigence, he had
been able to extract some assistance. He had, indeed, in a manner vowed
that the deil should have him, if ever he put the print of his foot
within its causeway again. He had hitherto kept his word; and, strange
to tell, this secession had, as he intended, in some degree, the effect
of a punishment upon the refractory feuars. Mr. Balderstone had been a
person in their eyes connected with a superior order of beings, whose
presence used to grace their little festivities, whose advice they found
useful on many occasions, and whose communications gave a sort of credit
to their village. The place, they acknowledged, "didna look as it used
to do, and should do, since Mr. Caleb keepit the castle sae closely;
but doubtless, touching the eggs and butter, it was a most unreasonable
demand, as Mr. Dingwall had justly made manifest."

Thus stood matters betwixt the parties, when the old butler, though it
was gall and wormwood to him, found himself obliged either to ackowledge
before a strange man of quality, and, what was much worse, before that
stranger's servant, the total inability of Wolf's Crag to produce a
dinner, or he must trust to the compassion of the feuars of Wofl's Hope.
It was a dreadful degradation; but necessity was equally imperious and
lawless. With these feelings he entered the street of the village.

Willing to shake himself from his companion as soon as possible, he
directed Mr. Lockhard to Luckie Sma-trash's change-house, where a din,
proceeding from the revels of Bucklaw, Craigengelt, and their party,
sounded half-way down the street, while the red glare from the window
overpowered the grey twilight which was now settling down, and glimmered
against a parcel of old tubs, kegs, and barrels, piled up in the
cooper's yard, on the other side of the way.

"If you, Mr. Lockhard," said the old butler to his companion, "will be
pleased to step to the change-house where that light comes from, and
where, as I judge, they are now singing 'Cauld Kail in Aberdeen,' ye
may do your master's errand about the venison, and I will do mine about
Bucklaw's bed, as I return frae getting the rest of the vivers. It's no
that the venison is actually needfu'," he added, detaining his colleague
by the button, "to make up the dinner; but as a compliment to the
hunters, ye ken; and, Mr. Lockhard, if they offer ye a drink o' yill, or
a cup o' wine, or a glass o' brandy, ye'll be a wise man to take it,
in case the thunner should hae soured ours at the castle, whilk is ower
muckle to be dreaded."

He then permitted Lockhard to depart; and with foot heavy as lead, and
yet far lighter than his heart, stepped on through the unequal street
of the straggling village, meditating on whom he ought to make his
first attack. It was necessary he should find some one with whom old
acknowledged greatness should weigh more than recent independence, and
to whom his application might appear an act of high dignity, relenting
at once and soothing. But he could not recollect an inhabitant of a mind
so constructed. "Our kail is like to be cauld eneugh too," he reflected,
as the chorus of "Cauld Kail in Aberdeen" again reached his ears. The
minister--he had got his presentation from the late lord, but they had
quarrelled about teinds; the brewster's wife--she had trusted long, and
the bill was aye scored up, and unless the dignity of the family should
actually require it, it would be a sin to distress a widow woman.
None was so able--but, on the other hand, none was likely to be less
willing--to stand his friend upon the present occasion, than Gibbie
Girder, the man of tubs and barrels already mentioned, who had headed
the insurrection in the matter of the egg and butter subsidy. "But
a' comes o' taking folk on the right side, I trow," quoted Caleb to
himself; "and I had ance the ill hap to say he was but a Johnny New-come
in our town, and the carle bore the family an ill-will ever since.
But he married a bonny young quean, Jean Lightbody, auld Lightbody's
daughter, him that was in the steading of Loup-the-Dyke; and auld
Lightbody was married himsell to Marion, that was about my lady in
the family forty years syne. I hae had mony a day's daffing wi' Jean's
mither, and they say she bides on wi' them. The carle has Jacobuses and
Georgiuses baith, an ane could get at them; and sure I am, it's doing
him an honour him or his never deserved at our hand, the ungracious
sumph; and if he loses by us a'thegither, he is e'en cheap o't: he can
spare it brawly." Shaking off irresolution, therefore, and turning at
once upon his heel, Caleb walked hastily back to the cooper's house,
lifted the latch withotu ceremony, and, in a moment, found himself
behind the "hallan," or partition, from which position he could, himself
unseen, reconnoitre the interior of the "but," or kitchen apartment, of
the mansion.

Reverse of the sad menage at the Castle of Wolf's Crag, a bickering
fire roared up the cooper's chimney. His wife, on the one side, in
her pearlings and pudding-sleeves, put the last finishing touch to
her holiday's apparel, while she contemplated a very handsome and
good-humoured face in a broken mirror, raised upon the "bink" (the
shelves on which the plates are disposed) for her special accommodation.
Her mother, old Luckie Loup-the-Dyke, "a canty carline" as was within
twenty miles of her, according to the unanimous report of the "cummers,"
or gossips, sat by the fire in the full glory of a grogram gown, lammer
beads, and a clean cockernony, whiffing a snug pipe of tobacco, and
superintending the affairs of the kitchen; for--sight more interesting
to the anxious heart and craving entrails of the desponding seneschal
than either buxom dame or canty cummer--there bubbled on the aforesaid
bickering fire a huge pot, or rather cauldron, steaming with beef and
brewis; while before it revolved two spits, turned each by one of the
cooper's apprentices, seated in the opposite corners of the chimney, the
one loaded with a quarter of mutton, while the other was graced with a
fat goose and a brace of wild ducks. The sight and scent of such a
land of plenty almost wholly overcame the drooping spirits of Caleb. He
turned, for a moment's space to reconnoitre the "ben," or parlour end
of the house, and there saw a sight scarce less affecting to his
feelings--a large round table, covered for ten or twelve persons,
decored (according to his own favourite terms) with napery as white as
snow, grand flagons of pewter, intermixed with one or two silver cups,
containing, as was probable, something worthy the brilliancy of their
outward appearance, clean trenchers, cutty spoons, knives and forks,
sharp, burnished, and prompt for action, which lay all displayed as for
an especial festival.

"The devil's in the peddling tub-coopering carl!" muttered Caleb, in all
the envy of astonishment; "it's a shame to see the like o' them gusting
their gabs at sic a rate. But if some o' that gude cheer does not find
its way to Wolf's Crag this night, my name is not Caleb Balderstone."

So resolving, he entered the apartment, and, in all courteous greeting,
saluted both the mother and the daughter. Wolf's Crag was the court of
the barony, Caleb prime minister at Wolf's Crag; and it has ever been
remarked that, though the masculine subject who pays the taxes sometimes
growls at the courtiers by whom they are imposed, the said courtiers
continue, nevertheless, welcome to the fair sex, to whom they furnish
the newest small-talk and the earliest fashions. Both the dames were,
therefore, at once about old Caleb's neck, setting up their throats
together by way of welcome.

"Ay, sirs, Mr. Balderstone, and is this you? A sight of you is gude for
sair een. Sit down--sit down; the gudeman will be blythe to see you--ye
nar saw him sae cadgy in your life; but we are to christen our bit wean
the night, as ye will hae heard, and doubtless ye will stay and see the
ordinance. We hae killed a wether, and ane o' our lads has been out wi'
his gun at the moss; ye used to like wild-fowl."

"Na, na, gudewife," said Caleb; "I just keekit in to wish ye joy, and I
wad be glad to hae spoken wi' the gudeman, but----" moving, as if to go
away.

"The ne'er a fit ye's gang," said the elder dame, laughing and holding
him fast, with a freedom which belonged to their old acquaintance;
"wha kens what ill it may bring to the bairn, if ye owerlook it in that
gate?"

"But I'm in a preceese hurry, gudewife," said the butler, suffering
himself to be dragged to a seat without much resistance; "and as to
eating," for he observed the mistress of the dwelling bustling about to
place a trencher for him--"as for eating--lack-a-day, we are just killed
up yonder wi' eating frae morning to night! It's shamefu' epicurism; but
that's what we hae gotten frae the English pock-puddings." "Hout,
never mind the English pock-puddings," said Luckie Lightbody; "try our
puddings, Mr. Balderstone; there is black pudding and white-hass; try
whilk ye like best."

"Baith gude--baith excellent--canna be better; but the very smell is
eneugh for me that hae dined sae lately (the faithful wretch had fasted
since daybreak). But I wadna affront your housewifeskep, gudewife; and,
with your permission, I'se e'en pit them in my napkin, and eat them to
my supper at e'en, for I am wearied of Mysie's pastry and nonsense; ye
ken landward dainties aye pleased me best, Marion, and landward lasses
too (looking at the cooper's wife). Ne'er a bit but she looks far better
than when she married Gilbert, and then she was the bonniest lass in our
parochine and the neist till't. But gawsie cow, goodly calf."

The women smiled at the compliment each to herself, and they smiled
again to each other as Caleb wrapt up the puddings in a towel which he
had brought with him, as a dragoon carries his foraging bag to receive
what my fall in his way.

"And what news at the castle?" quo' the gudewife.

"News! The bravest news ye ever heard--the Lord Keeper's up yonder wi'
his fair daughter, just ready to fling her at my lord's head, if he
winna tak her out o' his arms; and I'se warrant he'll stitch our auld
lands of Ravenswood to her petticoat tail."

"Eh! sirs--ay!--and will hae her? and is she weel-favoured? and what's
the colour o' her hair? and does she wear a habit or a railly?" were the
questions which the females showered upon the butler.

"Hout tout! it wad tak a man a day to answer a' your questions, and I
hae hardly a minute. Where's the gudeman?"

"Awa' to fetch the minister," said Mrs. Girder, "precious Mr. Peter
Bide-the-Bent, frae the Mosshead; the honest man has the rheumatism wi'
lying in the hills in the persecution."

"Ay! Whig and a mountain-man, nae less!" said Caleb, with a peevishness
he could not suppress. "I hae seen the day, Luckie, when worthy Mr.
Cuffcushion and the service-book would hae served your turn (to the
elder dame), or ony honest woman in like circumstances."

"And that's true too," said Mrs. Lightbody, "but what can a body do?
Jean maun baith sing her psalms and busk her cockernony the gate the
gudeman likes, and nae ither gate; for he's maister and mair at hame, I
can tell ye, Mr. Balderstone."

"Ay, ay, and does he guide the gear too?" said Caleb, to whose projects
masculine rule boded little good. "Ilka penny on't; but he'll dress her
as dink as a daisy, as ye see; sae she has little reason to complain:
where there's ane better aff there's ten waur."

"Aweel, gudewife," said Caleb, crestfallen, but not beaten off, "that
wasna the way ye guided your gudeman; bt ilka land has its ain lauch.
I maun be ganging. I just wanted to round in the gudeman's lug, that I
heard them say up-bye yonder that Peter Puncheon, that was cooper to the
Queen's stores at the Timmer Burse at Leith, is dead; sae I though that
maybe a word frae my lord to the Lord Keeper might hae served Gilbert;
but since he's frae hame----"

"O, but ye maun stay his hame-coming," said the dame. "I aye telled
the gudeman ye meant weel to him; but he taks the tout at every bit
lippening word."

"Aweel, I'll stay the last minute I can."

"And so," said the handsome young spouse of Mr. Girder, "ye think this
Miss Ashton is weel-favoured? Troth, and sae should she, to set up for
our young lord, with a face and a hand, and a seat on his horse, that
might become a king's son. D'ye ken that he aye glowers up at my window,
Mr. Balderstone, when he chaunces to ride thro' the town? Sae I hae a
right to ken what like he is, as weel as ony body."

"I ken that brawly," said Caleb, "for I hae heard his lordship say the
cooper's wife had the blackest ee in the barony; and I said, 'Weel may
that be, my lord, for it was her mither's afore her, as I ken to my
cost.' Eh, Marion? Ha, ha, ha! Ah! these were merry days!"

"Hout awa', auld carle," said the old dame, "to speak sic daffing to
young folk. But, Jean--fie, woman, dinna ye hear the bairn greet? I'se
warrant it's that dreary weid has come ower't again."

Up got mother and grandmother, and scoured away, jostling each other as
they ran, into some remote corner of the tenement, where the young hero
of the evening was deposited. When Caleb saw the coast fairly clear,
he took an invigorating pinch of snuff, to sharpen and confirm his
resolution.

"Cauld be my cast," thought he, "if either Bide-the-Bent or Girder taste
that broach of wild-fowl this evening"; and then addressing the eldest
turnspit, a boy of about eleven years old, and putting a penny into his
hand, he said, "Here is twal pennies, my man; carry that ower to Mrs.
Sma'trash, and bid her fill my mill wi' snishing, and I'll turn the
broche for ye in the mean time; and she will gie ye a ginge-bread snap
for your pains."

No sooner was the elder boy departed on this mission than Caleb, looking
the remaining turnspit gravely and steadily in the face, removed from
the fire the spit bearing the wild-fowl of which he had undertaken the
charge, clapped his hat on his head, and fairly marched off with it,
he stopped at the door of the change-house only to say, in a few brief
words, that Mr. Hayston of Bucklaw was not to expect a bed that evening
in the castle.

If this message was too briefly delivered by Caleb, it became absolute
rudeness when conveyed through the medium of a suburb landlady; and
Bucklaw was, as a more calm and temperate man might have been, highly
incensed. Captain Craigengelt proposed, with the unanimous applause of
all present, that they should course the old fox (meaning Caleb) ere he
got to cover, and toss him in a blanket. But Lockhard intimated to
his master's servants and those of Lord Bittlebrains, in a tone of
authority, that the slightest impertinence to the Master of Ravenswood's
domestic would give Sir William Ashton the highest offence. And having
so said, in a manner sufficient to prevent any aggression on their part,
he left the public-house, taking along with him two servants loaded with
such provisions as he had been able to procure, and overtook Caleb just
when he had cleared the village.




CHAPTER XIII.

     Should I take aught of you? 'Tis true I begged now;
     And what is worse than that, I stole a kindness;
     And, what is worst of all, I lost my way in't.

     Wit Without Money.

THE face of the little boy, sole witness of Caleb's infringement upon
the laws at once of property and hospitality, would have made a good
picture. He sat motionless, as if he had witnessed some of the spectral
appearances which he had heard told of in a winter's evening; and as he
forgot his own duty, and allowed his spit to stand still, he added to
the misfortunes of the evening by suffering the mutton to burn as black
as a coal. He was first recalled from his trance of astonishment by
a hearty cuff administered by Dame Lightbody, who, in whatever other
respects she might conform to her name, was a woman strong of person,
and expert in the use of her hands, as some say her deceased husband had
known to his cost.

"What garr'd ye let the roast burn, ye ill-clerkit gude-for-nought?"

"I dinna ken," said the boy.

"And where's that ill-deedy gett, Giles?"

"I dinna ken," blubbered the astonished declarant.

"And where's Mr. Balderstone?--and abune a', and in the name of council
and kirk-session, that I suld say sae, where's the broche wi' the
wild-fowl?" As Mrs. Girder here entered, and joined her mother's
exclamations, screaming into one ear while the old lady deafened the
other, they succeeded in so utterly confounding the unhappy urchin, that
he could not for some time tell his story at all, and it was only when
the elder boy returned that the truth began to dawn on their minds.

"Weel, sirs!" said Mrs. Lightbody, "wha wad hae thought o' Caleb
Balderstone playing an auld acquaintance sic a pliskie!"

"Oh, weary on him!" said the spouse of Mr. Girder; "and what am I to
say to the gudeman? He'll brain me, if there wasna anither woman in a'
Wolf''s Hope."

"Hout tout, silly quean," said the mother; "na, na, it's come to muckle,
but it's no come to that neither; for an he brain you he maun brain me,
and I have garr'd his betters stand back. Hands aff is fair play; we
maunna heed a bit flyting."

The tramp of horses now announced the arrival of the cooper, with the
minister. They had no sooner dismounted than they made for the kitchen
fire, for the evening was cool after the thunderstorm, and the woods wet
and dirty. The young gudewife, strong in the charms of her Sunday gown
and biggonets, threw herself in the way of receiving the first attack,
while her mother, like the veteran division of the Roman legion,
remained in the rear, ready to support her in case of necessity. Both
hoped to protract the discovery of what had happened--the mother, by
interposing her bustling person betwixt Mr. Girder and the fire, and the
daughter, by the extreme cordiality with which she received the minister
and her husband, and the anxious fears which she expressed lest they
should have "gotten cauld." "Cauld!" quoted the husband, surlily, for he
was not of that class of lords and masters whose wives are viceroys
over them, "we'll be cauld eneugh, I think, if ye dinna let us in to the
fire."

And so saying, he burst his way through both lines of defence; and, as
he had a careful eye over his property of every kind, he perceived at
one glance the absence of the spit with its savoury burden. "What the
deil, woman----"

"Fie for shame!" exclaimed both the women; "and before Mr.
Bide-the-Bent!"

"I stand reproved," said the cooper; "but--"

"The taking in our mouths the name of the great enemy of our souls,"
said Mr. Bide-the-Bent--

"I stand reproved," said the cooper.

"--Is an exposing ourselves to his temptations," continued the reverend
monitor, "and in inviting, or, in some sort, a compelling, of him to lay
aside his other trafficking with unhappy persons, and wait upon those in
whose speech his name is frequent."

"Weel, weel, Mr. Bide-the-Bent, can a man do mair than stand reproved?"
said the cooper; "but jest let me ask the women what for they hae dished
the wild-fowl before we came."

"They arena dished, Gilbert," said his wife; "but--but an accident----"

"What accident?" said Girder, with flashing eyes. "Nae ill come ower
them, I trust? Uh?"

His wife, who stood much in awe of him, durst not reply, but her mother
bustled up to her support, with arms disposed as if they were about to
be a-kimbo at the next reply.--"I gied them to an acquaintance of mine,
Gibbie Girder; and what about it now?"

Her excess of assurance struck Girder mute for an instant. "And YE gied
the wild-fowl, the best end of our christening dinner, to a friend of
yours, ye auld rudas! And what might HIS name be, I pray ye?"

"Just worthy Mr. Caleb Balderstone--frae Wolf's Crag," answered Marion,
prompt and prepared for battle.

Girder's wrath foamed over all restraint. If there was a circumstance
which could have added to the resentment he felt, it was that this
extravagant donation had been made in favour of our friend Caleb,
towards whom, for reasons to which the reader is no stranger, he
nourished a decided resentment. He raised his riding-wand against the
elder matron, but she stood firm, collected in herself, and undauntedly
brandished the iron ladle with which she had just been "flambing"
(Anglice, basting) the roast of mutton. Her weapon was certainly the
better, and her arm not the weakest of the two; so that Gilbert thought
it safest to turn short off upon his wife, who had by this time hatched
a sort of hysterical whine, which greatly moved the minister, who was in
fact as simple and kind-hearted a creature as ever breathed. "And you,
ye thowless jade, to sit still and see my substance disponed upon to
an idle, drunken, reprobate, worm-eaten serving-man, just because he
kittles the lugs o' a silly auld wife wi' useless clavers, and every twa
words a lee? I'll gar you as gude----"

Here the minister interposed, both by voice and action, while Dame
Lightbody threw herself in front of her daughter, and flourished her
ladle.

"Am I no to chastise my ain wife?" exclaimed the cooper very
indignantly.

"Ye may chastise your ain wife if ye like," answered Dame Lightbody;
"but ye shall never lay finger on my daughter, and that ye may found
upon." "For shame, Mr. Girder!" said the clergyman; "this is what I
little expected to have seen of you, that you suld give rein to your
sinful passions against your nearest and your dearest, and this night
too, when ye are called to the most solemn duty of a Christian parent;
and a' for what? For a redundancy of creature-comforts, as worthless as
they are unneedful."

"Worthless!" exclaimed the cooper. "A better guse never walkit on
stubble; two finer, dentier wild ducks never wat a feather."

"Be it sae, neighbour," rejoined the minister; "but see what
superfluities are yet revolving before your fire. I have seen the day
when ten of the bannocks which stand upon that board would have been an
acceptable dainty to as many men, that were starving on hills and bogs,
and in caves of the earth, for the Gospel's sake."

"And that's what vexes me maist of a'," said the cooper, anxious to get
some one to sympathise with his not altogether causeless anger; "an the
quean had gien it to ony suffering sant, or to ony body ava but that
reaving, lying, oppressing Tory villain, that rade in the wicked troop
of militia when it was commanded out against the sants at Bothwell Brig
by the auld tyrant Allan Ravenswood, that is gane to his place, I wad
the less hae minded it. But to gie the principal parts o' the feast to
the like o' him----!"

"Aweel, Gilbert," said the minister, "and dinna ye see a high judgment
in this? The seed of the righteous are not seen begging their bread:
think of the son of a powerful oppressor being brought to the pass of
supporting his household from your fulness."

"And, besides," said the wife, "it wasna for Lord Ravenswood neither,
an he wad hear but a body speak: it was to help to entertain the Lord
Keeper, as they ca' him, that's up yonder at Wolf's Crag."

"Sir William Ashton at Wolf's Crag!" ejaculated the astonished man of
hoops and staves.

"And hand and glove wi' Lord Ravenswood," added Dame Lightbody.

"Doited idiot! that auld, clavering sneckdrawer wad gar ye trow the moon
is made of green cheese. The Lord Keeper and Ravenswood! they are cat
and dog, hare and hound."

"I tell ye they are man and wife, and gree better than some others that
are sae," retorted the mother-in-law; "forbye, Peter Puncheon, that's
cooper the Queen's stores, is dead, and the place is to fill, and----"

"Od guide us, wull ye haud your skirling tongues!" said Girder,--for
we are to remark, that this explanation was given like a catch for two
voices, the younger dame, much encouraged by the turn of the debate,
taking up and repeating in a higher tone the words as fast as they were
uttered by her mother.

"The gudewife says naething but what's true, maister," said Girder's
foreman, who had come in during the fray. "I saw the Lord Keeper's
servants drinking and driving ower at Luckie Sma'trash's, ower-bye
yonder."

"And is their maister up at Wolf's Crag?" said Girder.

"Ay, troth is he," replied his man of confidence.

"And friends wi' Ravenswood?"

"It's like sae," answered the foreman, "since he is putting up wi' him."

"And Peter Puncheon's dead?"

"Ay, ay, Puncheon has leaked out at last, the auld carle," said the
foreman; "mony a dribble o' brandy has gaen through him in his day. But
as for the broche and the wild-fowl, the saddle's no aff your mare yet,
maister, and I could follow and bring it back, for Mr. Balderstone's no
far aff the town yet."

"Do sae, Will; and come here, I'll tell ye what to do when ye owertake
him."

He relieved the females of his presence, and gave Will his private
instructions.

"A bonny-like thing," said the mother-in-law, as the cooper re-entered
the apartment, "to send the innocent lad after an armed man, when ye ken
Mr. Balderstone aye wears a rapier, and whiles a dirk into the bargain."

"I trust," said the minister, "ye have reflected weel on what ye have
done, lest you should minister cause of strife, of which it is my duty
to say, he who affordeth matter, albeit he himself striketh not, is in
no manner guiltless."

"Never fash your beard, Mr. Bide-the-Bent," replied Girder; "ane canna
get their breath out here between wives and ministers. I ken best how to
turn my ain cake. Jean, serve up the dinner, and nae mair about it."

Nor did he again allude to the deficiency in the course of the evening.

Meantime, the foreman, mounted on his master's steed, and charged with
his special orders, pricked swiftly forth in pursuit of the marauder
Caleb. That personage, it may be imagined, did not linger by the way. He
intermitted even his dearly-beloved chatter, for the purpose of making
more haste, only assuring Mr. Lockhard that he had made the purveyor's
wife give the wild-fowl a few turns before the fire, in case that
Mysie, who had been so much alarmed by the thunder, should not have her
kitchen-grate in full splendour. Meanwhile, alleging the necessity of
being at Wolf's Crag as soon as possible, he pushed on so fast that his
companions could scarce keep up with him. He began already to think he
was safe from pursuit, having gained the summit of the swelling eminence
which divides Wolf's Crag from the village, when he heard the distant
tread of a horse, and a voice which shouted at intervals, "Mr.
Caleb--Mr. Balderstone--Mr. Caleb Balderstone--hollo--bide a wee!"

Caleb, it may be well believed, was in no hurry to acknowledge the
summons. First, he would not heart it, and faced his companions down,
that it was the echo of the wind; then he said it was not worth stopping
for; and, at length, halting reluctantly, as the figure of the horseman
appeared through the shades of the evening, he bent up his whole soul
to the task of defending his prey, threw himself into an attitude of
dignity, advanced the spit, which is his grasp might with its burden
seem both spear and shield, and firmly resolved to die rather than
surrender it.

What was his astonishment, when the cooper's foreman, riding up and
addressing him with respect, told him: "His master was very sorry he was
absent when he came to his dwelling, and grieved that he could not tarry
the christening dinner; and that he had taen the freedom to send a sma'
runlet of sack, and ane anker of brandy, as he understood there were
guests at the castle, and that they were short of preparation."

I have heard somewhere a story of an elderly gentleman who was pursued
by a bear that had gotten loose from its muzzle, until completely
exhausted. In a fit of desperation, he faced round upon Bruin and lifted
his cane; at the sight of which the instinct of discipline prevailed,
and the animal, instead of tearing him to pieces, rose up upon his
hind-legs and instantly began to shuffle a saraband. Not less than the
joyful surprise of the senior, who had supposed himself in the extremity
of peril from which he was thus unexpectedly relieved, was that of our
excellent friend Caleb, when he found the pursuer intended to add to
his prize, instead of bereaving him of it. He recovered his latitude,
however, instantly, so soon as the foreman, stooping from his nag, where
he sate perched betwixt the two barrels, whispered in his ear: "If
ony thing about Peter Puncheon's place could be airted their way, John
[Gibbie] Girder wad mak it better to the Master of Ravenswood than
a pair of new gloves; and that he wad be blythe to speak wi' Maister
Balderstone on that head, and he wad find him as pliant as a hoop-willow
in a' that he could wish of him."

Caleb heard all this without rendering any answer, except that of all
great men from Louis XIV. downwards, namely, "We will see about it"; and
then added aloud, for the edification of Mr. Lockhard: "Your master has
acted with becoming civility and attention in forwarding the liquors,
and I will not fail to represent it properly to my Lord Ravenswood. And,
my lad," he said, "you may ride on to the castle, and if none of the
servants are returned, whilk is to be dreaded, as they make day and
night of it when they are out of sight, ye may put them into the
porter's lodge, whilk is on the right hand of the great entry; the
porter has got leave to go to see his friends, sae ye will met no ane to
steer ye."

The foreman, having received his orders, rode on; and having deposited
the casks in the deserted and ruinous porter's lodge, he returned
unquestioned by any one. Having thus executed his master's commission,
and doffed his bonnet to Caleb and his company as he repassed them in
his way to the village, he returned to have his share of the christening
festivity.




CHAPTER XIV.

     As, to the Autumn breeze's bugle sound,
     Various and vague the dry leaves dance their round;
     Or, from the garner-door, on ether borne,
     The chaff flies devious from the winnow'd corn;
     So vague, so devious, at the breath of heaven,
     From their fix'd aim are mortal counsels driv'n.

     Anonymous.

WE left Caleb Balderstone in the extremity of triumph at the success of
his various achievements for the honour of the house of Ravenswood. When
he had mustered and marshalled his dishes of divers kinds, a more royal
provision had not been seen in Wolf's Crag since the funeral feast
of its deceased lord. Great was the glory of the serving-man, as he
"decored" the old oaken table with a clean cloth, and arranged upon it
carbonaded venison and roasted wild-fowl, with a glance, every now and
then, as if to upbraid the incredulity of his master and his guests; and
with many a story, more or less true, was Lockhard that evening regaled
concerning the ancient grandeur of Wolf's Crag, and the sway of its
barons over the country in their neighbourhood.

"A vassal scarce held a calf or a lamb his ain, till he had first
asked if the Lord of Ravenswood was pleased to accept it; and they were
obliged to ask the lord's consent before they married in these days,
and mony a merry tale they tell about that right as weel as others. And
although," said Caleb, "these times are not like the gude auld times,
when authority had its right, yet true it is, Mr. Lockhard, and you
yoursell may partly have remarked, that we of the house of Ravenswood
do our endeavour in keeping up, by all just and lawful exertion of our
baronial authority, that due and fitting connexion betwixt superior and
vassal, whilk is in some danger of falling into desuetude, owing to the
general license and misrule of these present unhappy times."

"Umph!" said Mr. Lockhard; "and if I may inquire, Mr. Balderstone, pray
do you find your people at the village yonder amenable? for I must needs
say, that at Ravenswood Castle, now pertaining to my master the Lord
Keeper, ye have not left behind ye the most compliant set of tenantry."

"Ah! but Mr. Lockhard," replied Caleb, "ye must consider there has been
a change of hands, and the auld lord might expect twa turns frae them,
when the new-comer canna get ane. A dour and fractious set they were,
thae tenants of Ravenswood, and ill to live wi' when they dinna ken
their master; and if your master put them mad ance, the whole country
will not put them down."

"Troth," said Mr. Lockhard, "an such be the case, I think the wisest
thing for us a' wad be to hammer up a match between your young lord and
our winsome young leddy up-bye there; and Sir William might just stitch
your auld barony to her gown-sleeve, and he wad sune cuitle another out
o' somebody else, sic a lang head as he has."

Caleb shook his head. "I wish," he said--"I wish that may answer, Mr.
Lockhard. There are auld prophecies about this house I wad like ill to
see fulfilled wi' my auld een, that has seen evil eneugh already."

"Pshaw! never mind freits," said his brother butler; "if the young folk
liked ane anither, they wad make a winsome couple. But, to say truth,
there is a leddy sits in our hall-neuk, maun have her hand in that as
weel as in every other job. But there's no harm in drinking to their
healths, and I will fill Mrs. Mysie a cup of Mr. Girder's canary."


While they thus enjoyed themselves in the kitchen, the company in
the hall were not less pleasantly engaged. So soon as Ravenswood had
determined upon giving the Lord Keeper such hospitality as he had to
offer, he deemed it incumbent on him to assume the open and courteous
brow of a well-pleased host. It has been often remarked, that when a man
commences by acting a character, he frequently ends by adopting it in
good earnest. In the course of an hour or two, Ravenswood, to his own
surprise, found himself in the situation of one who frankly does his
best to entertain welcome and honoured guests. How much of this change
in his disposition was to be ascribed to the beauty and simplicity of
Miss Ashton, to the readiness with which she accommodated herself to the
inconveniences of her situation; how much to the smooth and plausible
conversation of the Lord Keeper, remarkably gifted with those words
which win the ear, must be left to the reader's ingenuity to conjecture.
But Ravenswood was insensible to neither.

The Lord Keeper was a veteran statesman, well acquainted with courts
and cabinets, and intimate with all the various turns of public affairs
during the last eventful years of the 17th century. He could talk, from
his own knowledge, of men and events, in a way which failed not to win
attention, and had the peculiar art, while he never said a word which
committed himself, at the same time to persuade the hearer that he was
speaking without the least shadow of scrupulous caution or reserve.
Ravenswood, in spite of his prejudices and real grounds of resentment,
felt himself at once amused and instructed in listening to him, while
the statesman, whose inward feelings had at first so much impeded his
efforts to make himself known, had now regained all the ease and fluency
of a silver-tongued lawyer of the very highest order.

His daughter did not speak much, but she smiled; and what she did say
argued a submissive gentleness, and a desire to give pleasure, which,
to a proud man like Ravenswood, was more fascinating than the most
brilliant wit. Above all, he could not be observe that, whether from
gratitude or from some other motive, he himself, in his deserted and
unprovided hall, was as much the object of respectful attention to his
guests as he would have been when surrounded by all the appliances and
means of hospitality proper to his high birth. All deficiencies passed
unobserved, or, if they did not escape notice, it was to praise the
substitutes which Caleb had contrived to supply the want of the
usual accommodations. Where a smile was unavoidable, it was a very
good-humoured one, and often coupled with some well-turned compliment,
to show how much the guests esteemed the merits of their noble host,
how little they thought of the inconveniences with which they
were surrounded. I am not sure whether the pride of being found to
outbalance, in virtue of his own personal merit, all the disadvantages
of fortune, did not make as favourable an impression upon the haughty
heart of the Master of Ravenswood as the conversation of the father and
the beauty of Lucy Ashton.

The hour of repose arrived. The Keeper and his daughter retired to their
apartments, which were "decored" more properly than could have been
anticipated. In making the necessary arrangements, Mysie had indeed
enjoyed the assistance of a gossip who had arrived from the village upon
an exploratory expedition, but had been arrested by Caleb, and impressed
into the domestic drudgery of the evening; so that, instead of returning
home to describe the dress and person of the grand young lady, she found
herself compelled to be active in the domestic economy of Wolf's Crag.

According to the custom of the time, the Master of Ravenswood attended
the Lord Keeper to his apartment, followed by Caleb, who placed on the
table, with all the ceremonials due to torches of wax, two rudely-framed
tallow-candles, such as in those days were only used by the peasantry,
hooped in paltry clasps of wire, which served for candlesticks. He then
disappeared, and presently entered with two earthen flagons (the china,
he said, had been little used since my lady's time), one filled with
canary wine, the other with brandy. The canary sack, unheeding all
probabilities of detection, he declared had been twenty years in the
cellars of Wolf's Crag, "though it was not for him to speak before their
honours; the brandy--it was weel-kenn'd liquor, as mild as mead and as
strong as Sampson; it had been in the house ever since the memorable
revel, in which auld Micklestob had been slain at the head of the stair
by Jamie of Jenklebrae, on account of the honour of the worshipful Lady
Muirend, wha was in some sort an ally of the family; natheless----"

"But to cut that matter short, Mr. Caleb," said the Keeper, "perhaps you
will favour me with a ewer of water."

"God forbid your lordship should drink water in this family," replied
Caleb, "to the disgrace of so honourable an house!"

"Nevertheless, if his lordship have a fancy," said the Master, smiling,
"I think you might indulge him; for, if I mistake not, there has been
water drank here at no distant date, and with good relish too."

"To be sure, if his lordship has a fancy," said Caleb; and re-entering
with a jug of pure element--"He will scarce find such water onywhere as
is drawn frae the well at Wolf's Crag; nevertheless----"

"Nevertheless, we must leave the Lord Keeper to his repose in this
poor chamber of ours," said the Master of Ravenswood, interrupting
his talkative domestic, who immediately turning to the doorway, with
a profound reverence, prepared to usher his master from the secret
chamber.

But the Lord Keeper prevented his host's departure.--"I have but one
word to say to the Master of Ravenswood, Mr. Caleb, and I fancy he will
excuse your waiting."

With a second reverence, lower than the former, Caleb withdrew; and his
master stood motionless, expecting, with considerable embarrassment,
what was to close the events of a day fraught with unexpected incidents.

"Master of Ravenswood," said Sir William Ashton, with some
embarrassment, "I hope you understand the Christian law too well to
suffer the sun to set upon your anger."

The Master blushed and replied, "He had no occasion that evening to
exercise the duty enjoined upon him by his Christian faith."

"I should have thought otherwise," said his guest, "considering the
various subjects of dispute and litigation which have unhappily occurred
more frequently than was desirable or necessary betwixt the late
honourable lord, your father, and myself."

"I could wish, my lord," said Ravenswood, agitated by suppressed
emotion, "that reference to these circumstances should be made anywhere
rather than under my father's roof."

"I should have felt the delicacy of this appeal at another time," said
Sir William Ashton, "but now I must proceed with what I mean to say.
I have suffered too much in my own mind, from the false delicacy which
prevented my soliciting with earnestness, what indeed I frequently
requested, a personal communing with your father: much distress of mind
to him and to me might have been prevented."

"It is true," said Ravenswood, after a moment's reflection, "I have
heard my father say your lordship had proposed a personal interview."

"Proposed, my dear Master? I did indeed propose it; but I ought to have
begged, entreated, beseeched it. I ought to have torn away the veil,
which interested persons had stretched betwixt us, and shown myself as
I was, willing to sacrifice a considerable part even of my legal rights,
in order to conciliate feelings so natural as his must be allowed to
have been. Let me say for myself, my young friend, for so I will call
you, that had your father and I spent the same time together which
my good fortune has allowed me to-day to pass in your company, it is
possible the land might yet have enjoyed one of the most respectable of
its ancient nobility, and I should have been spared the pain of parting
in enmity from a person whose general character I so much admired and
honoured."

He put his handkerchief to his eyes. Ravenswood also was moved, but
awaited in silence the progress of this extraordinary communication.

"It is necessary," continued the Lord Keeper, "and proper that you
should understand, that there have been many points betwixt us, in
which, although I judged it proper that there should be an exact
ascertainment of my legal rights by the decree of a court of justice,
yet it was never my intention to press them beyond the verge of equity."

"My lord," said the Master of Ravenswood, "it is unnecessary to pursue
this topic farther. What the law will give you, or has given you, you
enjoy--or you shall enjoy; neither my father nor I myself would have
received anything on the footing of favour."

"Favour! No, you misunderstand me," resumed the Keeper; "or rather you
are no lawyer. A right may be good in law, and ascertained to be so,
which yet a man of honour may not in every case care to avail himself
of."

"I am sorry for it, my lord," said the Master.

"Nay, nay," retorted his guest, "you speak like a young counsellor;
your spirit goes before your wit. There are many things still open for
decision betwixt us. Can you blame me, an old man desirous of peace, and
in the castle of a young nobleman who has saved my daughter's life and
my own, that I am desirous, anxiously desirous, that these should be
settled on the most liberal principles?" The old man kept fast hold of
the Master's passive hand as he spoke, and made it impossible for him,
be his predetermination what it would, to return any other than an
acquiescent reply; and wishing his guest good-night, he postponed
farther conference until the next morning.

Ravenswood hurried into the hall, where he was to spend the night, and
for a time traversed its pavement with a disordered and rapid pace.
His mortal foe was under his roof, yet his sentiments towards him were
neither those of a feudal enemy nor of a true Christian. He felt as if
he could neither forgive him in the one character, nor follow forth his
vengeance in the other, but that he was making a base and dishonourable
composition betwixt his resentment against the father and his affection
for his daughter. He cursed himself, as he hurried to and fro in the
pale moonlight, and more ruddy gleams of the expiring wood-fire. He
threw open and shut the latticed windows with violence, as if alike
impatient of the admission and exclusion of free air. At length,
however, the torrent of passion foamed off its madness, and he flung
himself into the chair which he proposed as his place of repose for the
night.

"If, in reality," such were the calmer thoughts that followed the first
tempest of his passion--"if, in reality, this man desires no more than
the law allows him--if he is willing to adjust even his acknowledged
rights upon an equitable footing, what could be my father's cause of
complaint?--what is mine? Those from who we won our ancient possessions
fell under the sword of my ancestors, and left lands and livings to the
conquerors; we sink under the force of the law, now too powerful for the
Scottish cavalry. Let us parley with the victors of the day, as if we
had been besieged in our fortress, and without hope of relief. This
man may be other than I have thought him; and his daughter--but I have
resolved not to think of her."

He wrapt his cloak around him, fell asleep, and dreamed of Lucy Ashton
till daylight gleamed through the lattices.
