
424. *_A Character_.

The principal features are taken from that of my friend Robert Jones.


425. *_To my Sister_. [V.]

Composed in front of Alfoxden House.

My little boy-messenger on this occasion was the son of Basil Montagu.
The larch mentioned in the first stanza was standing when I revisited
the place in May, 1841, more than forty years after. I was disappointed
that it had not improved in appearance, as to size, nor had it acquired
anything of the majesty of age, which, even though less perhaps than any
other tree, the larch sometimes does. A few score yards from this tree
grew, when we inhabited Alfoxden, one of the most remarkable beech-trees
ever seen. The ground sloped both towards and from it. It was of immense
size, and threw out arms that struck into the soil like those of the
banyan-tree, and rose again from it. Two of the branches thus inserted
themselves twice, which gave to each the appearance of a serpent moving
along by gathering itself up in folds. One of the large boughs of this
tree had been torn off by the wind before we left Alfoxden, but five
remained. In 1841 we could barely find the spot where the tree had
stood. So remarkable a production of nature could not have been wilfully
destroyed.


426. *_Simon Lee, the old Huntsman_. [VI.]

This old man had been huntsman to the Squires of Alfoxden, which, at the
time we occupied it, belonged to a minor. The old man's cottage stood
upon the Common, a little way from the entrance to Alfoxden Park. But
[in 1841] it had disappeared. Many other changes had taken place in the
adjoining village, which I could not but notice with a regret more
natural than well-considered. Improvements but rarely appear such to
those who after long intervals of time revisit places they have had much
pleasure in. It is unnecessary to add, the fact was as mentioned in the
poem; and I have, after an interval of forty-five years, the image of
the old man as fresh before my eyes as if I had seen him yesterday. The
expression when the hounds were out, 'I dearly love their voice,' was
word for word from his own lips.


427. *_Lines written in Germany_. 1798-9. [VII.]

    'A plague,' &c.

A bitter winter it was when these verses were composed by the side of my
sister, in our lodgings, at a draper's house, in the romantic imperial
town of Goslar, on the edge of the Hartz Forest. In this town the German
Emperors of the Franconian line were accustomed to keep their court, and
it retains vestiges of ancient splendour. So severe was the cold of this
winter, that when we passed out of the parlour warmed by the stove, our
cheeks were struck by the air as by cold iron. I slept in a room over a
passage that was not ceiled. The people of the house used to say rather
unfeelingly, that they expected I should be frozen to death some night;
but with the protection of a pelisse lined with fur, and a dog's-skin
bonnet, such as was worn by the peasants, I walked daily on the
ramparts, or on a sort of public ground or garden, in which was a pond.
Here I had no companion but a kingfisher, a beautiful creature that
used to glance by me. I consequently became much attached to it. During
these walks I composed the poem that follows, 'The Poet's Epitaph.'

Foot-note.--The Reader must be apprised, that the Stoves in North
Germany generally have the impression of a gallopping horse upon them,
this being part of the Brunswick Arms.


428. *_To the Daisy_. [IX.]

This and the other poems addressed to the same flower were composed at
Town-End, Grasmere, during the earlier part of our residence there. I
have been censured for the last line but one, 'thy function
apostolical,' as being little less than profane. How could it be thought
so? The word is adopted with reference to its derivation, implying
something sent on a mission; and assuredly, this little flower,
especially when the subject of verse, may be regarded, in its humble
degree, as administering both to moral and to spiritual purposes.


429. _Matthew_. [X.]

In the school [of Hawkshead] is a tablet, on which are inscribed, in
gilt letters, the names of the several persons who have been
schoolmasters there since the foundation of the school, with the time at
which they entered upon and quitted their office. Opposite to one of
those names the Author wrote the following lines: 'If Nature,' &c.


430. *_Matthew_. [X.]

Such a tablet as is here spoken of continued to be preserved in
Hawkshead school, though the inscriptions were not brought down to our
time. This and other poems connected with Matthew would not gain by a
literal detail of facts. Like the wanderer in the 'Excursion,' this
schoolmaster was made up of several, both of his class and men of other
occupations. I do not ask pardon for what there is of untruth in such
verses, considered strictly as matters of fact. It is enough if, being
true and consistent in spirit, they move and teach in a manner not
unworthy of a Poet's calling.


431. *_Personal Talk_. [XIII.]

Written at Town-End. The last line but two stood at first, better and
more characteristically, thus:

    'By my half-kitchen and half-parlour fire.'

My sister and I were in the habit of having the teakettle in our little
sitting-room; and we toasted the bread ourselves, which reminds me of a
little circumstance not unworthy of being set down among these minutiae.
Happening both of us to be engaged a few minutes one morning, when we
had a young prig of a Scotch lawyer to breakfast with us, my dear
sister, with her usual simplicity, put the toasting-fork with a slice of
bread into the hands of this Edinburgh genius. Our little book-case
stood on one side of the fire. To prevent loss of time, he took down a
book, and fell to reading, to the neglect of the toast, which was burnt
to a cinder. Many a time have we laughed at this circumstance and other
cottage simplicities of that day. By the bye, I have a spite at one of
this series of sonnets (I will leave the reader to discover which), as
having been the means of nearly putting off for ever our acquaintance
with dear Miss Fenwick, who has always stigmatised one line of it as
vulgar, and worthy only of having been composed by a country squire.


432. *_To the Spade of a Friend_. 1804. [XIV.]

This person was Thomas Wilkinson, a Quaker by religious profession; by
natural constitution of mind--or, shall I venture to say, by God's
grace? he was something better. He had inherited a small estate, and
built a house upon it, near Yanwath, upon the banks of the Emont. I have
heard him say that his heart used to beat, in his boyhood, when he heard
the sound of a drum and fife. Nevertheless, the spirit of enterprise in
him confined itself in tilling his ground, and conquering such obstacles
as stood in the way of its fertility. Persons of his religious
persuasion do now, in a far greater degree than formerly, attach
themselves to trade and commerce. He kept the old track. As represented
in this poem, he employed his leisure hours in shaping pleasant walks by
the side of his beloved river, where he also built something between a
hermitage and a summer-house, attaching to it inscriptions, after the
manner of Shenstone at his Leasowes. He used to travel from time to
time, partly from love of Nature, and partly with religious friends, in
the service of humanity. His admiration of genius in every department
did him much honour. Through his connection with the family in which
Edmund Burke was educated, he became acquainted with that great man, who
used to receive him with great kindness and condescension; and many
times have I heard Wilkinson speak of those interesting interviews. He
was honoured also by the friendship of Elizabeth Smith, and of Thomas
Clarkson and his excellent wife, and was much esteemed by Lord and Lady
Lonsdale, and every member of that family. Among his verses (he wrote
many), are some worthy of preservation; one little poem in particular,
upon disturbing, by prying curiosity, a bird while hatching her young in
his garden. The latter part of this innocent and good man's life was
melancholy. He became blind, and also poor, by becoming surety for some
of his relations. He was a bachelor. He bore, as I have often witnessed,
his calamities with unfailing resignation. I will only add, that while
working in one of his fields, he unearthed a stone of considerable size,
then another, and then two more; and observing that they had been placed
in order, as if forming the segment of a circle, he proceeded carefully
to uncover the soil, and brought into view a beautiful Druid's temple,
of perfect, though small dimensions. In order to make his farm more
compact, he exchanged this field for another, and, I am sorry to add,
the new proprietor destroyed this interesting relic of remote ages for
some vulgar purpose. The fact, so far as concerns Thomas Wilkinson, is
mentioned in the note on a sonnet on 'Long Meg and her Daughters.'


433. *_A Night Thought_. [XV.]

These verses were thrown off extempore upon leaving Mr. Luff's house at
Fox Ghyll one evening. The good woman is not disposed to look at the
bright side of things, and there happened to be present certain ladies
who had reached the point of life where _youth_ is ended, and who seemed
to contend with each other in expressing their dislike of the country
and the climate. One of them had been, heard to say she could not endure
a country where there was 'neither sunshine nor cavaliers.' [In pencil
on opposite page--Gossip.]


434. *_An Incident characteristic of a favourite Dog_. [XVI.]

This dog I knew well. It belonged to Mrs. Wordsworth's brother, Mr.
Thomas Hutchinson, who then lived at Sockburn-on-the-Tees, a beautiful
retired situation, where I used to visit him and his sisters before my
marriage. My sister and I spent many months there after my return from
Germany in 1799.


435. _Tribute to the Memory of the same Dog_. [XVII.]

Was written at the same time, 1805. The dog Music died, aged and blind,
by falling into a draw-well at Gallow Hill, to the great grief of the
family of the Hutchinsons, who, as has been before mentioned, had
removed to that place from Sockburn.


436. _Fidelity_. [XVIII.]

The young man whose death gave occasion to this poem was named Charles
Gough, and had come early in the Spring to Patterdale for the sake of
angling. While attempting to cross over Helvellyn to Grasmere he slipped
from a steep part of the rock where the ice was not thawed, and
perished. His body was discovered as described in this poem. Walter
Scott heard of the accident, and both he and I, without either of us
knowing that the other had taken up the subject, each wrote a poem in
admiration of the dog's fidelity. His contains a most beautiful stanza:

    'How long didst thou think that his silence was slumber!
    When the wind waved his garment how oft didst thou start!'

I will add that the sentiment in the last four lines of the last stanza
of my verses was uttered by a shepherd with such exactness, that a
traveller, who afterwards reported his account in print, was induced to
question the man whether he had read them, which he had not.


437. *_Ode to Duty_. [XIX.]

This Ode, written in 1805, is on the model of Gray's 'Ode to Adversity,'
which is copied from Horace's 'Ode to Fortune.'

Many and many a time have I been twitted by my wife and sister for
having forgotten this dedication of myself to the stern law-giver.
Transgressor indeed I have been, from hour to hour, from day to day; I
would fain hope however not more flagrantly or in a worse way than most
of my tuneful brethren. But these last words are in a wrong strain. We
should be rigorous to ourselves, and forbearing, if not indulgent, to
others, and if we make comparisons at all it ought to be with those who
have morally excelled us. [In pencil--But is not the first stanza of
Gray's from a chorus of Aeschylus? And is not Horace's Ode also modelled
on the Greek?]


438. *_Character of the Happy Warrior_. [XX.]

The course of the great war with the French naturally fixed one's
attention upon the military character; and, to the honour of our
country, there are many illustrious instances of the qualities that
constitute its highest excellence. Lord Nelson carried most of the
virtues that the trials he was exposed to in his department of the
service necessarily call forth and sustain, if they do not produce the
contrary vices. But his public life was stained with one great crime, so
that, though many passages of these lines were suggested by what was
generally known as excellent in his conduct, I have not been able to
connect his name with the poem as I could wish, or even to think of him
with satisfaction in reference to the idea of what a warrior ought to
be. For the sake of such of my friends as may happen to read this note I
will add, that many elements of the character here portrayed were found
in my brother John, who perished by shipwreck, as mentioned elsewhere.
His messmates used to call him 'the Philosopher;' from which it must be
inferred that the qualities and dispositions I allude to had not escaped
their notice. He often expressed his regret, after the war had continued
some time, that he had not chosen the Naval instead of the East India
Company's Service, to which his family connection had led him. He
greatly valued moral and religious instruction for youth, as tending to
make good sailors. The best, he used to say, came from Scotland; the
next to them from the north of England, especially from Westmoreland and
Cumberland, where, thanks to the piety and local attachments of our
ancestors, endowed, or, as they are called, free-schools abound.


439. *_The Force of Prayer_. [XXI.]

An appendage to 'The White Doe.' My friend, Mr. Rogers, has also written
on the subject. The story is preserved in Dr. Whitaker's _History of
Craven_, a topographical writer of first-rate merit in all that concerns
the past; but such was his aversion from the modern spirit, as shown in
the spread of manufactories in those districts of which he treated, that
his readers are left entirely ignorant, both of the progress of these
arts, and their real bearing upon the comfort, virtues, and happiness of
the inhabitants.

While wandering on foot through the fertile valleys, and over the
moorlands of the Apennine that divides Yorkshire from Lancashire, I used
to be delighted with observing the number of substantial cottages that
had sprung up on every side, each having its little plot of fertile
ground, won from the surrounding waste. A bright and warm fire, if
needed, was always to be found in these dwellings. The father was at his
loom, the children looked healthy and happy. Is it not to be feared that
the increase of mechanic power has done away with many of these
blessings, and substituted many evils? Alas, if these evils grow, how
are they to be checked, and where is the remedy to be found? Political
economy will not supply it, that is certain. We must look to something
deeper, purer, and higher.


440. *_A Fact and an Imagination_. [XXII.]

The first and last four lines of this poem each make a sonnet, and were
composed as such. But I thought that by intermediate lines they might be
connected so as to make a whole. One or two expressions are taken from
Milton's _History of England_.


441. *_A little Onward_. [XXIII.]

The complaint in my eyes which gave occasion to this address to my
daughter first showed itself as a consequence of inflammation, caught at
the top of Kirkstone, when I was over-heated by having carried up the
ascent my eldest son, a lusty infant. Frequently has the disease
recurred since, leaving the eyes in a state which has often prevented my
reading for months, and makes me at this day incapable of bearing
without injury any strong light by day or night. My acquaintance with
books has therefore been far short of my wishes, and on this account, to
acknowledge the services daily and hourly done me by my family and
friends, this note is written.


442. _Ode to Lycoris_. [XXIV.]

This, as well as the preceding and the two that follow, were composed in
front of Rydal Mount, and during my walks in the neighbourhood.
Nine-tenths of my verses have been murmured out in the open air. And
here let me repeat what I believe has already appeared in print. One day
a stranger, having walked round the garden and grounds of Rydal Mount,
asked of one of the female servants, who happened to be at the door,
permission to see her master's Study. 'This,' said she, leading him
forward, 'is my master's library, where he keeps his books; but his
study is out of doors.' After a long absence from home, it has more than
once happened that some one of my cottage neighbours (not of the
double-coach-house cottages) has said, 'Well, there he is; we are glad
to hear him _booing_ about again.' Once more, in excuse for so much
egotism, let me say these notes are written for my familiar friends, and
at their earnest request. Another time a gentleman, whom James had
conducted through the grounds, asked him what kind of plants throve best
there. After a little consideration, he answered, 'Laurels.' 'That is,'
said the stranger, 'as it should be. Don't you know that the laurel is
the emblem of poetry, and that poets used, on public occasions, to be
crowned with it?' James stared when the question was first put, but was
doubtless much pleased with the information.


443. *_Ibid._

The discerning reader who is aware that in the poem of 'Ellen Irwin' I
was desirous of throwing the reader at once out of the old ballad, so as
if possible to preclude a comparison between that mode of dealing with
the subject and the mode I meant to adopt, may here, perhaps, perceive
that this poem originated in the four last lines of the first stanza.
These specks of snow reflected in the lake, and so transferred, as it
were, to the subaqueous sky, reminded me of the swans which the fancy of
the ancient classic poets yoked to the car of Venus. Hence the tenor of
the whole first stanza and the name of Lycoris, which with some readers,
who think mythology and classical allusion too far-fetched, and
therefore more or less unnatural or affected, will tend to unrealise the
sentiment that pervades these verses. But surely one who has written so
much in verse as I have done may be allowed to retrace his steps into
the regions of fancy which delighted him in his boyhood, when he first
became acquainted with the Greek and Roman Poets. Before I read Virgil I
was so strongly attached to Ovid, whose _Metamorphoses_ I read at
school, that I was quite in a passion whenever I found him, in books of
criticism, placed below Virgil. As to Homer, I was never weary of
travelling over the scenes through which he led me. Classical literature
affected me by its own beauty. But the truths of Scripture having been
entrusted to the dead languages, and these fountains having been
recently laid open at the Reformation, an importance and a sanctity were
at that period attached to classical literature that extended, as is
obvious in Milton's _Lycidas_, for example, both to its spirit and form
in a degree that can never be revived. No doubt the hackneyed and
lifeless use into which mythology fell towards the close of the 17th
century, and which continued through the 18th, disgusted the general
reader with all allusion to it in modern verse. And though, in deference
to this disgust, and also in a measure participating in it, I abstained
in my earlier writings from all introduction of pagan fable,--surely,
even in its humble form, it may ally itself with real sentiment--as I
can truly affirm it did in the present case.


444. *_Memory_. [XXVIII.]

The verses 'Or strayed from hope and promise, self-betrayed,' were, I am
sorry to say, suggested from apprehensions of the fate of my friend
H.C., the subject of the verses addressed to H.C. when six years old.
The piece which follows, to 'Memory,' arose out of similar feelings.


445. *_This Lawn_. [XXIX.]

This lawn is the sloping one approaching the kitchen-garden, and was
made out of it. Hundreds of times have I here watched the dancing of
shadows amid a press of sunshine, and other beautiful appearances of
light and shade, flowers and shrubs. What a contrast between this and
the cabbages and onions and carrots that used to grow there on a piece
of ugly-shaped unsightly ground! No reflection, however, either upon
cabbages or onions. The latter, we know, were worshipped by the
Egyptians; and he must have a poor eye for beauty who has not observed
how much of it there is in the form and colour which cabbages and plants
of this genus exhibit through the various stages of their growth and
decay. A richer display of colour in vegetable nature can scarcely be
conceived than Coleridge, my sister, and I saw in a bed of potatoe
plants in blossom near a hut upon the moor between Inversneyd and Loch
Katrine. These blossoms were of such extraordinary beauty and richness
that no one could have passed them without notice. But the sense must be
cultivated through the mind before we can perceive those inexhaustible
treasures of Nature--for such they truly are--without the least
necessary reference to the utility of her productions, or even to the
laws whereupon, as we learn by research, they are dependent. Some are of
opinion that the habit of analysing, decomposing, and anatomising, is
inevitably unfavourable to the perception of beauty. People are led into
this mistake by overlooking the fact that such processes being to a
certain extent within the reach of a limited intellect, we are apt to
ascribe to them that insensibility of which they are in truth the
effect, and not the cause. Admiration and love, to which all knowledge
truly vital must tend, are felt by men of real genius in proportion as
their discoveries in Natural Philosophy are enlarged; and the beauty in
form of a plant or an animal is not made less but more apparent as a
whole by a more accurate insight into its constituent properties and
powers. A _Savant_, who is not also a poet in soul and a religionist in
heart, is a feeble and unhappy creature.


446. *_Humanity_. [XXX.]

These verses and the preceding ones, entitled 'Liberty,' were composed
as one piece, which Mrs. W. complained of as unwieldy and
ill-proportioned; and accordingly it was divided into two, on her
judicious recommendation.

[Printed notes: 'The rocking-stones alluded to in the beginning of the
following verses are supposed to have been used, by our British
ancestors, both for judicial and religious purposes. Such stones are not
uncommonly found, at this day, both in Great Britain and in Ireland.' On
l. 32, 'Descending to the worm in charity:' 'I am indebted here to a
passage in one of Mr. Digby's valuable works.']


447. *_Thought on the Seasons_. [XXXI.]

Written at Rydal Mount, 1829.


448. *_To_ ----, _on the Birth of her first Child_. [XXXII.]

Written at Moresby near Whitehaven, 1833, when I was on a visit to my
son, then incumbent of that small living. While I am dictating these
Notes to my friend Miss Fenwick, Jan. 24th, 1843, the child, upon whose
birth these verses were written, is under my roof, and is of a
disposition so promising that the wishes and prayers and prophecies
which I then breathed forth in verse are, thro' God's mercy, likely to
be realised. [In pencil--Jane?]


449. *_The Warning: a Sequel to the Foregoing_. [XXXIII.]

These lines were composed during the fever spread through the nation by
the Reform Bill. As the motives which led to this measure, and the good
or evil which has attended or has risen from it, will be duly
appreciated by future historians, there is no call for dwelling on the
subject in this place. I will content myself with saying that the then
condition of the people's mind is not, in these verses, exaggerated.


450. *_The Labourer's Noon-day Hymn_. [XXXV.]

Bishop Ken's Morning and Evening Hymns are, as they deserve to be,
familiarly known. Many other hymns have also been written on the same
subjects; but not being aware of any being designed for noon-day I was
induced to compose these verses. Often we had occasion to observe
cottage children carrying in their baskets dinner to their fathers
engaged with their daily labours in the fields and woods. How gratifying
would it be to me could I be assured that any portion of these stanzas
had been sung by such a domestic concert under such circumstances. A
friend of mine has told me that she introduced this Hymn into a
village-school which she superintended; and the stanzas in succession
furnished her with texts to comment upon in a way which without
difficulty was made intelligible to the children, and in which they
obviously took delight; and they were taught to sing it to the tune of
the old 100th Psalm.


451. *_Ode composed on May Morning_. [XXXVI.]

*_To May_. [XXXVII.]

These two Poems originated in these lines 'How delicate, &c.' My
daughter and I left Rydal Mount upon a Tour through our mountains with
Mr. and Mrs. Carr, in the month of May 1826; and as we were going up the
Vale of Newlands I was struck with the appearance of the little chapel
gleaming through the veil of half-opened leaves, and the feeling which
was then conveyed to my mind was expressed in the stanza that follows.
As in the case of 'Liberty' and 'Humanity,' mentioned before, my first
intention was to write only one Poem; but subsequently I broke it into
two, making additions to each part, so as to produce a consistent and
appropriate whole.


452. *_Lines suggested by a Portrait from the Pencil of F. Stone_.
[XXXVIII.]

*_The foregoing Subject resumed_. [XXXIX.]

This Portrait has hung for many years in our principal sitting-room, and
represents J.Q. as she was when a girl. The picture, though it is
somewhat thinly painted, has much merit in tone and general effect. It
is chiefly valuable, however, from the sentiment that pervades it. The
anecdote of the saying of the monk in sight of Titian's picture was told
in this house by Mr. Wilkie, and was, I believe, first communicated to
the public in this poem, the former portion of which I was composing at
the time. Southey heard the story from Miss Hutchinson, and transferred
it to the 'Doctor;' but it is not easy to explain how my friend Mr.
Rogers, in a note subsequently added to his 'Italy,' was led to speak of
the same remarkable words having many years before been spoken in his
hearing by a monk or priest in front of a picture of the Last Supper
placed over a refectory-table in a convent at Padua. [Printed note on
XXXVIII., last line: 'The Escurial. The pile of buildings composing the
palace and convent of San Lorenzo has, in common usage, lost its proper
name in that of the Escurial, a village at the foot of the hill upon
which the splendid edifice, built by Philip the Second, stands. It need
scarcely be added, that Wilkie is the painter alluded to.' On XXXIX.:

    'Frail ties, dissolving or dissolved
    On earth, will be revived, we trust, in heaven.'

'In the class entitled "Musings," in Mr. Southey's Minor Poems, is one
upon his own miniature picture, taken in childhood, and another upon a
landscape painted by Gaspar Poussin. It is possible that every word of
the above verses, though similar in subject, might have been written had
the author been unacquainted with those beautiful effusions of poetic
sentiment. But, for his own satisfaction, he must be allowed thus
publicly to acknowledge the pleasure those two Poems of his friend have
given him, and the grateful influence they have upon his mind as often
as he reads them or thinks of them.']


453. *_Upon seeing a coloured Drawing of the Bird of Paradise in an
Album_. [XLI.]

I cannot forbear to record that the last seven lines of this poem were
composed in bed, during the night of the day on which my sister S.H.
died, about six P.M., and it was the thought of her innocent and
beautiful life that through faith prompted the words:

    'On wings that fear no glance of God's pure sight,
    No tempest from His breath.'

The reader will find two Poems on pictures of this bird among my Poems.
I will here observe, that in a far greater number of instances than have
been mentioned in these Notes one Poem has, as in this case, grown out
of another, either because I felt the subject had been inadequately
treated or that the thoughts and images suggested in course of
composition have been such as I found interfered with the unity
indispensable to every work of art, however humble in character.




XIX. SONNETS DEDICATED TO LIBERTY AND ORDER.


454. _Change_, [iv. 1. 14.]

    'Perilous is sweeping change, all chance unsound.'
    'All change is perilous, and all chance unsound.' SPENSER.


455. _American Repudiation_. [VIII.]

'Men of the Western World.'

These lines were written several years ago, when reports prevailed of
cruelties committed in many parts of America, by men making a law of
their own passions. A far more formidable, as being a more deliberate
mischief, has appeared among those States, which have lately broken
faith with the public creditor in a manner so infamous. I cannot,
however, but look at both evils under a similar relation to inherent
good, and hope that the time is not distant when our brethren of the
West will wipe off this stain from their name and nation.


456. _To the Pennsylvanians_. [IX.]

Happily the language of expostulation in which this Sonnet is written is
no longer applicable. It will be gratifying to Americans and Englishmen
(indignos fraternum rumpere foedus) to read the following particulars
communicated in a letter from Mr. Reed, dated October 28, 1850. 'In Mr.
Wordsworth's letters to me you will have observed that a good deal is
said on the Pennsylvania Loans, a subject in which, as you are aware, he
was interested for his friends rather than for himself. Last December,
when I learned that a new edition of his poems was in press, I wrote to
him (it was my last letter) to say frankly that his Sonnet "To
Pennsylvanians" _was no longer just_, and to desire him _not to let_ it
stand so for after time. It was very gratifying to me on receiving a
copy of the new edition, which was not till after his death, to find the
'_additional note_' at the end of the fifth volume, showing by its being
printed on the unusual place of a fly-leaf, that he had been anxious to
attend to such a request. It was characteristic of that righteousness
which distinguished him as an author; and it has this interest (as I
conjecture) that it was probably the last sentence he composed for the
press. It is chiefly on this account that I mention it to you.'[7]

[7] _Memoirs_, ii. p. 114.


457. *_Feel for the Wrongs, &c._ [XIV.]

This Sonnet is recommended to the perusal of the Anti-Corn-Law-Leaguers,
the Political Economists, and of all those who consider that the evils
under which we groan are to be removed or palliated by measures
ungoverned by moral and religious principles.


458. _Sonnets upon the Punishment of Death_,[XX.]

Of these Sonnets the author thus wrote to John Peace, Esq., Bristol:

                        Rydal Mount, Feb. 23. 1842.

MY DEAR SIR,

I was truly pleased with the receipt of the letter which you were put
upon writing by the perusal of my 'Penal Sonnets' in the _Quarterly
Review_. Being much engaged at present, I might have deferred making my
acknowledgments for this and other favours (particularly your 'Descant')
if I had not had a special occasion for addressing you at this moment. A
Bristol lady has kindly undertaken to be the bearer of the walking-stick
which I spoke to you of some time since. It was cut from a holly-tree
planted in our garden by my own hand.

       *       *       *       *       *

Your 'Descant' amused me, but I must protest against your system, which
would discard punctuation to the extent you propose. It would, I think,
destroy the harmony of blank verse when skilfully written. What would
become of the pauses at the third syllable followed by an _and_, or any
such word, without the rest which a comma, when consistent with the
sense, calls upon the reader to make, and which being made, he starts
with the weak syllable that follows, as from the beginning of a verse? I
am sure Milton would have supported me in this opinion. Thomson wrote
his blank verse before his ear was formed as it was when he wrote the
'Castle of Indolence,' and some of his short rhyme poems. It was,
therefore, rather hard in you to select him as an instance of
punctuation abused. I am glad that you concur in my view on the
_Punishment of Death_. An outcry, as I expected, has been raised against
me by weak-minded humanitarians. What do you think of one person having
opened a battery of nineteen fourteen-pounders upon me, _i.e._ nineteen
sonnets, in which he gives himself credit for having blown me and my
system to atoms? Another sonneteer has had a solitary shot at me from
Ireland.

                  Ever faithfully yours,
                           W. WORDSWORTH.[8]

[8] _Memoirs_, ii. pp. 386-7.

       *       *       *       *       *




XX. MISCELLANEOUS POEMS.


459. _Epistle to Sir G. H. Beaumont, Bart_.[1.]

From the South-west Coast of Cumberland,--1811. This poem opened, when
first written, with a paragraph that has been transferred as an
introduction to the first series of my 'Scotch Memorials.' The journey,
of which the first part is here described, was from Grasmere to Bootle,
on the south-west coast of Cumberland, the whole along mountain-roads,
through a beautiful country, and we had fine weather. The verses end
with our breakfast at the Head of Yewdale, in a yeoman's house, which,
like all the other property in that sequestered vale, has passed, or is
passing, into the hands of Mr. James Marshall, of Monk Coniston, in Mr.
Knott's, the late owner's time, called Waterhead. Our hostess married a
Mr. Oldfield, a lieutenant in the navy; they lived together for some
time at Hackett, where she still resides as his widow. It was in front
of that house, on the mountain-side, near which stood the peasant who,
while we were passing at a distance, saluted us, waving a kerchief in
his hand, as described in the poem. The dog which we met soon after our
starting, had belonged to Mr. Rowlandson, who for forty years was curate
at Grasmere, in place of the rector, who lived to extreme old age, in a
state of insanity. Of this Mr. R. much might be said, both with
reference to his character, and the way in which he was regarded by his
parishioners. He was a man of a robust frame, had a firm voice and
authoritative manner, of strong natural talents, of which he was
himself conscious, for he has been heard to say (it grieves me to add
with an oath), 'If I had been brought up at college by ---- I should have
been a Bishop.' Two vices used to struggle in him for mastery, avarice
and the love of strong drink. But avarice, as is common in like cases,
always got the better of its opponent, for though he was often
intoxicated it was never, I believe, at his own expense. As has been
said of one in a more exalted station, he could take any _given_
quantity. I have heard a story of him which is worth the telling. One
Summer's morning our Grasmere curate, after a night's carouse in the
Vale of Langdale, on his return home having reached a point near which
the whole Vale of Grasmere might be seen with the Lake immediately below
him, he stept aside and sat down upon the turf. After looking for some
time at the landscape, then in the perfection of its morning beauty, he
exclaimed, 'Good God! that I should have led so long such a life in such
a place!' This no doubt was deeply felt by him at the time, but I am not
authorised to say that any noticeable amendment followed. Penuriousness
strengthened upon him as his body grew feebler with age. He had
purchased property and kept some land in his own hands, but he could not
find in his heart to lay out the necessary hire for labourers at the
proper season, and consequently he has often been seen in half dotage
working his hay in the month of November by moonlight--a melancholy
sight, which I myself have witnessed. Notwithstanding all that has been
said, this man, on account of his talents and superior education, was
looked up to by his parishioners, who, without a single exception, lived
at that time (and most of them upon their own small inheritances) in a
state of republican equality, a condition favourable to the growth of
kindly feelings among them, and, in a striking degree, exclusive to
temptations to gross vice and scandalous behaviour. As a pastor, their
curate did little or nothing for them; but what could more strikingly
set forth the efficacy of the Church of England, through its Ordinances
and Liturgy, than that, in spite of the unworthiness of the minister,
his church was regularly attended; and though there was not much
appearance in his flock of what might be called animated piety,
intoxication was rare, and dissolute morals unknown? With the Bible they
were, for the most part, well acquainted, and, as was strikingly shown
when they were under affliction, must have been supported and comforted
by habitual belief in those truths which it is the aim of the Church to
inculcate. [Notes: 'Sled' (l.110)--a local word for sledge; 'bield' (l.
175)--a word common in the country, signifying shelter, as in Scotland.]


460. *_Upon perusing the foregoing Epistle, thirty Years after its
Composition_.

Loughrigg Tarn.

This beautiful pool, and the surrounding scene, are minutely described
in my little book on the Lakes.

Sir G.H.B., in the earlier part of his life, was induced, by his love of
Nature and the art of painting, to take up his abode at Old Brathay,
about three miles from this spot, so that he must have seen it [the
Tarn] under many aspects; and he was so much pleased with it, that he
purchased the Tarn with a view to build such a residence as is alluded
to in this 'Epistle.' Baronets and knights were not so common in that
day as now, and Sir M. le Fleming, not liking to have a rival in this
kind of distinction so near him, claimed a sort of lordship over the
territory, and showed dispositions little in unison with those of Sir G.
Beaumont, who was eminently a lover of peace. The project of building
was given up, Sir G.B. retaining possession of the Tarn. Many years
afterwards, a Kendal tradesman, born upon its banks, applied to me for
the purchase of it, and, accordingly, it was sold for the sum that had
been given for it, and the money was laid out, under my direction, upon
a substantial oak fence for a certain number of yew-trees, to be planted
in Grasmere Churchyard. Two were planted in each enclosure, with a view
to remove, after a certain time, the one which throve the least. After
several years, the stouter plant being left, the others were taken up,
and placed in other parts of the same churchyard, and were adequately
fenced at the expense and under the care of the late Mr. Barber, Mr.
Greenwood, and myself. The whole eight are now thriving, and are an
ornament to a place which, during late years, has lost much of its
rustic simplicity by the introduction of iron palisades, to fence off
family burying-grounds, and by numerous monuments, some of them in very
bad taste, from which this place of burial was in my memory quite free:
see the lines in the sixth book of 'The Excursion,' beginning,

    'Green is the Churchyard.'

The 'Epistle,' to which these notes refer, though written so far back as
1811, was carefully revised so late as 1842, previous to its
publication. I am loath to add, that it was never seen by the person to
whom it is addressed. So sensible am I of the deficiencies in all that I
write, and so far does every thing that I attempt fall short of what I
wish it to be, that even private publication, if such a term may be
allowed, requires more resolution than I can command. I have written to
give vent to my own mind, and not without hope that, some time or other,
kindred minds might benefit by my labours; but I am inclined to believe
I should never have ventured to send forth any verses of mine to the
world, if it had not been done on the pressure of personal occasions.
Had I been a rich man, my productions, like this 'Epistle,' the 'Tragedy
of the Borderers,' &c., would most likely have been confined to MS.


461. _Ibid._

Loughrigg Tarn, alluded to in the foregoing Epistle, resembles, though
much smaller in compass, the Lake Nemi, or _Speculum Dianae_ as it is
often called, not only in its clear waters and circular form, and the
beauty immediately surrounding it, but also as being overlooked by the
eminence of Langdale Pikes as Lake Nemi is by that of Monte Calvo. Since
this Epistle was written Loughrigg Tarn has lost much of its beauty by
the felling of many natural clumps of wood, relics of the old forest,
particularly upon the farm called 'The Oaks,' from the abundance of that
tree which grew there.

It is to be regretted, upon public grounds, that Sir George Beaumont did
not carry into effect his intention of constructing here a Summer
Retreat in the style I have described; as his taste would have set an
example how buildings, with all the accommodations modern society
requires, might be introduced even into the most secluded parts of this
country without injuring their native character. The design was not
abandoned from failure of inclination on his part, but in consequence of
local untowardness which need not be particularised.


462. *_Gold and Silver Fishes in a Vase_.[II.]

They were a present from Miss Jewsbury, of whom mention is made in the
Note at the end of the next poem. The fish were healthy to all
appearance in their confinement for a long time, but at last, for some
cause we could not make out, languished; and one of them being all but
dead, they were taken to the pool under the old pollard oak. The
apparently dying one lay on its side unable to move. I used to watch it,
and about the tenth day it began to right itself, and in a few days more
was able to swim about with its companions. For many months they
continued to prosper in their new place of abode; but one night by an
unusually great flood they were swept out of the pool and perished, to
our great regret.


463. *_Liberty_ (_Sequel to the above_). [III.]

The connection of this with the preceding poem is sufficiently obvious.


464. _Liberty_. [III.]

    'Life's book for thee may be unclosed, till age
    Shall with a thankful tear bedrop its latest page.'

There is now, alas! no possibility of the anticipation, with which the
above Epistle concludes, being realised: nor were the verses ever seen
by the Individual for whom they were intended. She accompanied her
husband, the Rev. Wm. Fletcher, to India, and died of cholera, at the
age of thirty-two or thirty-three years, on her way from Shalapore to
Bombay, deeply lamented by all who knew her.

Her enthusiasm was ardent, her piety steadfast; and her great talents
would have enabled her to be eminently useful in the difficult path of
life to which she had been called. The opinion she entertained of her
own performances, given to the world under her maiden name, Jewsbury,
was modest and humble, and, indeed, far below their merits; as is often
the case with those who are making trial of their powers, with a hope to
discover what they are best fitted for. In one quality, viz., quickness
in the motions of her mind, she had, within the range of the Author's
acquaintance, no equal.


465. _Poor Robin_. [IV.]

The small wild Geranium known by that name.


466. *_Ibid._

I often ask myself what will become of Rydal Mount after our day. Will
the old walls and steps remain in front of the house and about the
grounds, or will they be swept away with all the beautiful mosses and
ferns and wild geraniums and other flowers which their rude construction
suffered and encouraged to grow among them? This little wild flower,
'Poor Robin,' is here constantly courting my attention and exciting what
may be called a domestic interest with the varying aspects of its stalks
and leaves and flowers. Strangely do the tastes of men differ, according
to their employment and habits of life. 'What a nice well would that
be,' said a labouring man to me one day, 'if all that rubbish was
cleared off.' The 'rubbish' was some of the most beautiful mosses and
lichens and ferns and other wild growths, as could possibly be seen.
Defend us from the tyranny of trimness and neatness, showing itself in
this way! Chatterton says of Freedom, 'Upon her head wild weeds were
spread,' and depend upon it, if 'the marvellous boy' had undertaken to
give Flora a garland, he would have preferred what we are apt to call
weeds to garden-flowers. True taste has an eye for both. Weeds have been
called flowers out of place. I fear the place most people would assign
to them is too limited. Let them come near to our abodes, as surely they
may without impropriety or disorder.


467. *_To the Lady le Fleming_. [IX.]

After thanking in prose Lady Fleming for the service she had done to her
neighbourhood by erecting this Chapel, I have nothing to say beyond the
expression of regret that the architect did not furnish an elevation
better suited to the site in a narrow mountain pass, and what is of more
consequence, better constructed in the interior for the purposes of
worship. It has no chancel. The Altar is unbecomingly confined. The Pews
are so narrow as to preclude the possibility of kneeling. There is no
vestry, and what ought to have been first mentioned, the Font, instead
of standing at its proper place at the entrance, is thrust into the
farthest end of a little pew. When these defects shall be pointed out to
the munificent patroness, they will, it is hoped, be corrected. [In
pencil--Have they not been corrected in part at least? 1843.]


468. *_To a Redbreast (in Sickness)_. [VI.]

Almost the only Verses composed by our lamented sister S.H. [=Miss Sarah
Hutchinson, sister of Mrs. Wordsworth].


469. *_Floating Island_. [VII.]

My poor sister takes a pleasure in repeating these Verses, which she
composed not long before the beginning of her sad illness.


470. *_Once I could hail, &c._ [VIII.]

'No faculty yet given me to espy the dusky shape.' Afterwards, when I
could not avoid seeing it, I wondered at this, and the more so because,
like most children, I had been in the habit of watching the moon thro'
all her changes, and had often continued to gaze at it while at the
full, till half-blinded.


471. *_The Gleaner (suggested by a Picture)_.

This poem was first printed in the Annual called 'The Keep-sake.' The
Painter's name I am not sure of, but I think it was Holmes.


472. _Nightshade_. [IX. ii. 6.]

Bekangs Ghyll--or the dell of Nightshade--in which stands St. Mary's
Abbey in Low Furness.


473. _Churches--East and West_. [X.]

Our churches, invariably perhaps, stand east and west, but why is by few
persons exactly known; nor that the degree of deviation from due east
often noticeable in the ancient ones was determined, in each particular
case, by the point on the horizon at which the sun rose upon the day of
the saint to whom the church was dedicated. These observances of our
ancestors, and the causes of them, are the subject of the following
stanzas.


474. _The Horn of Egremont Castle_. [XI.]

This story is a Cumberland tradition. I have heard it also related of
the Hall of Hutton John, an ancient residence of the Huddlestons, in a
sequestered valley upon the river Dacor. [In the I.F. MSS. the Note runs
thus: '1806. A tradition transferred from the ancient mansion of Hutton
John, the seat of the Huddlestons, to Egremont Castle.']


475. *_Goody Blake and Harry Gill_. [XII.]

Written at Alfoxden, 1798. The incident from Dr. Darwin's _Zoonomia_.


476. *_To a Child: written in her Album_. [XIV.]

This quatrain was extempore on observing this image, as I had often
done, on the lawn of Rydal Mount. It was first written down in the Album
of my god-daughter, Rotha Quillinan.


477. *_Lines written in the Album of the Countess of Lonsdale_. [XV.]

This is a faithful picture of that amiable Lady as she then was. The
youthfulness of figure and demeanour and habits, which she retained in
almost unprecedented degree, departed a very few years after, and she
died without violent disease by gradual decay, before she reached the
period of old age. [In pencil--Was she not 70? Mr. J.]


478. _The Russian Fugitive_. [XVII.]

Peter Henry Bruce, having given in his entertaining Memoirs the
substance of this Tale, affirms that, besides the concurring reports of
others, he had the story from the lady's own mouth. The Lady Catherine,
mentioned towards the close, is the famous Catherine, then bearing that
name as the acknowledged wife of Peter the Great.


479. *_Ibid._

Early in life this story had interested me; and I often thought it would
make a pleasing subject for an Opera or musical drama.




XXI. INSCRIPTIONS.

480. *(I.) In the grounds of Coleorton these verses are engraved on a
stone, placed near the tree, which was thriving and spreading when I saw
it in the summer of 1841.

481. *(II.) This Niche is in the sandstone rock in the winter-garden at
Coleorton, which garden, as has been elsewhere said, was made under our
direction out of an old unsightly quarry. While the labourers were at
work Mrs. Wordsworth, my sister, and I used to amuse ourselves
occasionally in scooping this seat out of the soft stone. It is of the
size, with something of the appearance, of a stall in a cathedral. This
inscription is not engraven, as the former and the two following are, in
the grounds.

482. *(VI.) The circumstance alluded to at the conclusion of these
verses was told me by Dr. Satterthwaite, who was Incumbent of Boodle, a
small town at the foot of Black Combe. He had the particulars from one
of the engineers, who was employed in making trigonometrical surveys of
that region.

483. *(VIII.) Engraven, during my absence in Italy, upon a brass plate
inserted in the stone.

484. *(IX.) The walk is what we call the far-terrace, beyond the
summer-house, at Rydal Mount. The lines were written when we were afraid
of being obliged to quit the place to which we were so much attached.

485. *(XI.) The monument of ice here spoken of I observed while
ascending the middle road of the three ways that lead from Rydal to
Grasmere. It was on my right hand, and my eyes were upon it when it
fell, as told in these lines.

486. *(XII.) Where the second quarry now is, as you pass from Rydal to
Grasmere, there was formerly a length of smooth rock that sloped towards
the road on the right hand. I used to call it tadpole slope, from having
frequently observed there the water bubbles gliding under the ice,
exactly in the shape of that creature.

       *       *       *       *       *




XXII. SELECTIONS FROM CHAUCER MODERNISED.

487. _Of the Volume in which the 'Selections' appeared_.

Of these 'Selections' the Author wrote as follows to Professor Reed, of
Philadelphia:

'There has recently been published in London a volume of some of
Chaucer's tales and poems modernised. This little specimen originated in
what I attempted with the "Prioress's Tale;" and if the book should find
its way to America, you will see in it two further specimens from
myself. I had no further connection with the publication than by making
a present of these to one of the contributors. Let me, however,
recommend to your notice the "Prologue" and the "Franklin's Tale;" they
are both by Mr. Horne, a gentleman unknown to me, but are, the latter in
particular, very well done. Mr. Leigh Hunt has not failed in the
"Manciple's Tale," which I myself modernised many years ago; but, though
I much admire the genius of Chaucer as displayed in this performance, I
could not place my version at the disposal of the editor, as I deemed
the subject somewhat too indelicate, for pure taste, to be offered to
the world at this time of day. Mr. Horne has much hurt this publication
by not abstaining from the "Reve's Tale;" this, after making all
allowance for the rude manners of Chaucer's age, is intolerable, and by
indispensably softening down the incidents, he has killed the spirit of
that humour, gross and farcical, that pervades the original. When the
work was first mentioned to me, I protested as strongly as possible
against admitting any coarseness or indelicacy; so that my conscience is
clear of countenancing aught of that kind. So great is my admiration of
Chaucer's genius, and so profound my reverence for him as an instrument
in the hands of Providence for spreading the light of literature through
his native land, that, notwithstanding the defects and faults in this
publication, I am glad of it, as a mean for making many acquainted with
the original who would otherwise be ignorant of everything about him but
his name.'[9]

[9] Extract: January 13th, 1841 (_Memoirs_, ii. p. 374-5).


488. _The Prioress's Tale_.

    'Call up him who left half told
    The story of Cambuscan bold.'

In the following Poem no further deviation from the original has been
made than was necessary for the fluent reading and instant understanding
of the Author: so much, however, is the language altered since Chaucer's
time, especially in pronunciation, that much was to be removed, and its
place supplied with as little incongruity as possible. The ancient
accent has been retained in a few conjunctions, as _alsò_ and _alwày_,
from a conviction that such sprinklings of antiquity would be admitted,
by persons of taste, to have a graceful accordance with the subject. The
fierce bigotry of the Prioress forms a fine back-ground for her
tender-hearted sympathies with the Mother and Child; and the mode in
which the story is told amply atones for the extravagance of the
miracle.




XXIII. POEMS REFERRING TO THE PERIOD OF OLD AGE.

489. _The Old Cumberland Beggar_. [I.]

The class of Beggars to which the Old Man here described belongs will
probably soon be extinct. It consisted of poor, and mostly old and
infirm persons, who confined themselves to a stated round in their
neighbourhood, and had certain fixed days, on which, at different
houses, they regularly received alms, sometimes in money, but mostly in
provisions.

490. *_Ibid._

Observed, and with great benefit to my own heart, when I was a child.
Written at Racedown and Alfoxden in my 23d year. The political
economists were about that time beginning their war upon mendicity in
all its forms, and by implication, if not directly, on alms-giving also.
This heartless process has been carried as far as it can go by the
AMENDED Poor Law Bill, tho' the inhumanity that prevails in this measure
is somewhat disguised by the profession that one of its objects is to
throw the poor upon the voluntary donations of their neighbours, that
is, if rightly interpreted, to force them into a condition between
relief in the Union Poor House and alms robbed of their Christian grace
and spirit, as being forced rather from the avaricious and selfish; and
all, in fact, but the humane and charitable are at liberty to keep all
they possess from their distressed brethren.

491. _The Farmer of Tilsbury Vale_.

With this picture, which was taken from real life, compare the
imaginative one of 'The Reverie of Poor Susan,' and see (to make up the
deficiencies of the class) 'The Excursion' _passim_.

492. _Ibid._

The character of this man was described to me, and the incident upon
which the verses turn was told me by Mr. Pool, of Nether Stowey, with
whom I became acquainted through our common friend S.T.C. During my
residence at Alfoxden, I used to see a great deal of him, and had
frequent occasions to admire the course of his daily life, especially
his conduct to his labourers and poor neighbours. Their virtues he
carefully encouraged, and weighed their faults in the scales of charity.
If I seem in these verses to have treated the weaknesses of the farmer
and his transgression too tenderly, it may in part be ascribed to my
having received the story from one so averse to all harsh judgment.
After his death was found in his _escritoir_ a lock of gray hair,
carefully preserved, with a notice that it had been cut from the head of
his faithful shepherd, who had served him for a length of years. I need
scarcely add that he felt for all men as brothers. He was much beloved
by distinguished persons:--Mr. Coleridge, Mr. Southey, Sir H. Davy, and
many others, and in his own neighbourhood was highly valued as a
magistrate, a man of business, and in every other social relation. The
latter part of the poem, perhaps, requires some apology, as being too
much of an echo to the 'Reverie of Poor Susan.'

493. _The small Celandine_. [III.]

See 'Poems of the Fancy' [XI.].

494. *_The two Thieves_. [IV.]

This is described from the life, as I was in the habit of observing when
a boy at Hawkshead School. Daniel was more than 80 years older than
myself when he was daily thus occupied under my notice. No book could
have so early taught me to think of the changes to which human life is
subject, and while looking at him I could not but say to myself, We may,
any of us, I or the happiest of my playmates, live to become still more
the object of pity than the old man, this half-doating pilferer.

495. *_Animal Tranquillity and Decay_. [V.]

If I recollect right, these verses were an overflow from the 'Old
Cumberland Beggar.'

       *       *       *       *       *




XXIV. EPITAPHS AND ELEGIAC PIECES.

496. *_From Chiabrera_. [I. to IX.]

Those from Chiabrera were chiefly translated when Mr. Coleridge was
writing his _Friend_, in which periodical my Essay on Epitaphs, written
about that time, was first published. For further notice of Chiabrera in
connection with his Epitaphs see 'Musings at Aquapendente.'

497. *_By a blest Husband, &c._

This lady was named Carleton. She, along with a sister, was brought up
in the neighbourhood of Ambleside. The Epitaph, a part of it at least,
is in the church at Bromsgrove, where she resided after her marriage.

498. _Cenotaph_.

In affectionate remembrance of Frances Fermor, whose remains are
deposited in the Church of Claines, near Worcester, this stone is
erected by her sister, Dame Margaret, wife of Sir George Beaumont,
Bart., who, feeling not less than the love of a brother for the
deceased, commends this memorial to the care of his heirs and successors
in the possession of this place. (See the verses on Mrs. F.)

499. *_Epitaph in the Chapel-yard of Langdale, Westmoreland_. [IV.]

Owen Lloyd, the subject of this Epitaph, was born at Old Brathay, near
Ambleside, and was the son of Charles Lloyd and his wife Sophia (née
Pemberton), both of Birmingham. They had many children, both sons and
daughters, of whom the most remarkable was the subject of this Epitaph.
He was educated under Dawes of Ambleside, Dr. Butler of Shrewsbury, and
lastly at Trin. Coll., Cambridge, where he would have been greatly
distinguished as a scholar, but for inherited infirmities of bodily
constitution, which from early childhood affected his mind. His love for
the neighbourhood in which he was born and his sympathy with the habits
and characters of the mountain yeomanry, in conjunction with irregular
spirits, that unfitted him for facing duties in situations to which he
was unaccustomed, inclined him to accept the retired curacy of Langdale.
How much he was beloved and honoured there and with what feelings he
discharged his duty under the oppressions of severe malady is set forth,
though imperfectly, in this Epitaph.


500. *_Address to the Scholars of the Village School_.

Were composed at Goslar in Germany. They will be placed among the
Elegiac pieces.


501. *_Elegiac Stanzas suggested by a Picture of Peel Castle_. [VI.]

Sir George Beaumont painted two pictures of this subject, one of which
he gave to Mrs. Wordsworth, saying she ought to have it: but Lady B.
interfered, and after Sir George's death she gave it to Sir Uvedale
Price, in whose house at Foxley I have seen it--rather grudgingly I own.


502. _Elegiac Verses_. [VIII.]

In memory of my Brother, John Wordsworth, Commander of the E.I.
Company's ship the Earl of Abergavenny, in which he perished by
calamitous shipwreck, Feb. 6, 1805. Composed near the Mountain track
that leads from Grasmere through Grisdale Hawes, where it descends
towards Patterdale. 1805.


503. _Moss Campion_ (_Silene acaulis_). [_Ibid._ II. l. 5.]

This most beautiful plant is scarce in England, though it is found in
great abundance upon the mountains of Scotland. The first specimen I
ever saw of it, in its native bed, was singularly fine, the tuft or
cushion being at least eight inches in diameter, and the root
proportionably thick. I have only met with it in two places among our
mountains, in both of which I have since sought for it in vain.

Botanists will not, I hope, take it ill, if I caution them against
carrying off, inconsiderately, rare and beautiful plants. This has often
been done, particularly from Ingleborough and other mountains in
Yorkshire, till the species have totally disappeared, to the great
regret of lovers of Nature living near the places where they grew.


504. _Lines_.

Composed at Grasmere, during a walk one evening after a stormy day, the
Author having just read in a newspaper that the dissolution of Mr. Fox
was hourly expected, 'Loud is the Vale,' &c. [IX.]


505. *_Invocation to the Earth_. [x.]

Composed immediately after the Thanksgiving Ode, to which it may be
considered as a second part.


506. *_Elegiac Stanzas. Addressed to Sir G.H.B_. [XII.]

On Mrs. Fermor. This lady had been a widow long before I knew her. Her
husband was of the family of the lady celebrated in the 'Rape of the
Lock,' and was, I believe, a Roman Catholic. The sorrow which his death
caused her was fearful in its character, as described in this Poem, but
was subdued in course of time by the strength of her religious faith. I
have been for many weeks at a time an inmate with her at Coleorton Hall,
as were also Mary and my sister. The truth in the sketch of her
character here given was acknowledged with gratitude by her nearest
relatives. She was eloquent in conversation, energetic upon public
matters, open in respect to these, but slow to communicate her personal
feelings. Upon these she never touched in her intercourse with me, so
that I could not regard myself as her confidential friend, and was
accordingly surprised when I learnt she had left me a legacy of 100_l._
as a token of her esteem. See in further illustration, the second stanza
inscribed upon her cenotaph in Coleorton Church.


507. *_Elegiac Musings in the Grounds of Coleorton Hall_.[XIII.]

These verses were in fact composed on horseback during a storm, whilst I
was on my way from Coleorton to Cambridge. They are alluded to
elsewhere. [Intercalated by Mrs. Quillinan--My father was on my pony,
which he rode all the way from Rydal to Cambridge that I might have the
comfort and pleasure of a horse at Cambridge. The storm of wind and rain
on this day was so violent that the coach in which my mother and I
travelled, the same coach, was all but blown over, and had the coachman
drawn up as he attempted to do at one of his halting-places, we must
have been upset. My father and his pony were several times actually
blown out of the road. D.Q.]


508. _Charles Lamb_. [XIV.]

    From the most gentle creature nursed in fields.

This way of indicating the _name_ of my lamented friend has been found
fault with; perhaps rightly so; but I may say in justification of the
double sense of the word, that similar allusions are not uncommon in
epitaphs. One of the best in our language in verse I ever read, was upon
a person who bore the name of Palmer; and the course of the thought,
throughout, turned upon the Life of the Departed, considered as a
pilgrimage. Nor can I think that the objection in the present case will
have much force with any one who remembers Charles Lamb's beautiful
sonnet addressed to his own name, and ending--

    'No deed of mine shall shame thee, gentle name!'


509. *_Ibid._

Light will be thrown upon the tragic circumstance alluded to in this
Poem when, after the death of Charles Lamb's sister, his biographer, Mr.
Serjeant Talfourd, shall be at liberty to relate particulars which could
not, at the time when his Memoir was written, be given to the public.
Mary Lamb was ten years older than her brother, and has survived him as
long a time. Were I to give way to my own feelings, I should dwell not
only on her genius and intellectual powers, but upon the delicacy and
refinement of manner which she maintained inviolable under most trying
circumstances. She was loved and honoured by all her brother's friends,
and others, some of them strange characters whom his philanthropic
peculiarities induced him to countenance. The death of C. Lamb himself
was doubtless hastened by his sorrow for that of Coleridge, to whom he
had been attached from the time of their being schoolfellows at Christ's
Hospital. Lamb was a good Latin scholar, and probably would have gone to
college upon one of the School foundations but for the impediment in his
speech. Had such been his lot, he would have probably been preserved
from the indulgences of social humours and fancies which were often
injurious to himself and causes of severe regret to his friends, without
really benefiting the object of his misapplied kindness.


510. *_Extempore Effusion upon the Death of James Hogg_. [XV.]

These verses were written extempore immediately after reading a notice
of the Ettrick Shepherd's death in the Newcastle Paper, to the Editor of
which I sent a copy for publication. The persons lamented in these
Verses were all either of my friends or acquaintance. In Lockhart's Life
of Sir Walter Scott an account is given of my first meeting with him in
1803. How the Ettrick Shepherd and I became known to each other has
already been mentioned in these Notes. He was undoubtedly a man of
original genius, but of coarse manners and low and offensive opinions.
Of Coleridge and Lamb I need not speak here. Crabbe I have met in London
at Mr. Rogers', but more frequently and favourably at Mr. Hoare's upon
Hampstead Heath. Every Spring he used to pay that family a visit of some
length, and was upon terms of intimate friendship with Mrs. Hoare, and
still more with her daughter-in-law, who has a large collection of his
letters addressed to herself. After the Poet's decease application was
made to her to give up these letters to his biographer, that they, or at
least a part of them, might be given to the public. She hesitated to
comply, and asked my opinion on the subject. 'By no means,' was my
answer, grounded not upon any objection there might be to publishing a
selection from those letters, but from an aversion I have always felt to
meet idle curiosity by calling back the recently departed to become the
object of trivial and familiar gossip. Crabbe obviously for the most
part preferred the company of women to that of men; for this among other
reasons, that he did not like to be put upon the stretch in general
conversation. Accordingly, in miscellaneous society his talk was so
much below what might have been expected from a man so deservedly
celebrated, that to me it seemed trifling. It must upon other occasions
have been of a different character, as I found in our rambles together
on Hampstead Heath; and not so much so from a readiness to communicate
his knowledge of life and manners as of natural history in all its
branches. His mind was inquisitive, and he seems to have taken refuge
from a remembrance of the distresses he had gone through in these
studies and the employments to which they led. Moreover such
contemplations might tend profitably to counterbalance the painful
truths which he had collected from his intercourse with mankind. Had I
been more intimate with him I should have ventured to touch upon his
office as a Minister of the Gospel, and how far his heart and soul were
in it, so as to make him a zealous and diligent labourer. In poetry,
tho' he wrote much, as we all know, he assuredly was not so. I happened
once to speak of pains as necessary to produce merit of a certain kind
which I highly valued. His observation was, 'It is not worth while.' You
are right, thought I, if the labour encroaches upon the time due to
teach truth as a steward of the mysteries of God; but if poetry is to be
produced at all, make what you do produce as good as you can. Mr. Rogers
once told me that he expressed his regret to Crabbe that he wrote in his
late works so much less correctly than in his earlier. 'Yes,' replied
he, 'but then I had a reputation to make; now I can afford to relax.'
Whether it was from a modest estimate of his own qualifications or from
causes less creditable, his motives for writing verse and his hopes and
aims were not so high as is to be desired. After being silent for more
than twenty years he again applied himself to poetry, upon the spur of
applause he received from the periodical publications of the day, as he
himself tells us in one of his Prefaces. Is it not to be lamented that a
man who was so conversant with permanent truth, and whose writings are
so valuable an acquisition to our country's literature, should have
_required_ an impulse from such a quarter?[10]

[10] In pencil on opposite page, by Mrs. Quillinan--Daddy dear, I don't
like this. Think how many reasons there were to depress his Muse--to say
nothing of his duties as a Priest, and probably he found poetry
interfere with them. He did not _require_ such praise to make him write,
but it just put it into his heart to try again, and gave him the courage
to do so. (See Notes and Illustrations at close. G)

Mrs. Hemans was unfortunate as a Poetess in being obliged by
circumstances to write for money, and that so frequently and so much,
that she was compelled to look out for subjects wherever she could find
them, and to write as expeditiously as possible. As a woman she was to a
considerable degree a spoilt child of the world. She had been early in
life distinguished for talents, and poems of hers were published whilst
she was a girl. She had also been handsome in her youth, but her
education had been most unfortunate. She was totally ignorant of
housewifery, and could as easily have managed the spear of Minerva as
her needle. It was from observing these deficiencies that one day, while
she was under my roof, I purposely directed her attention to household
economy, and told her I had purchased scales which I intended to present
to a young lady as a wedding present; pointed out their utility (for her
especial benefit), and said that no menage ought to be without them.
Mrs. Hemans, not in the least suspecting my drift, reported this saying
in a letter to a friend at the time, as a proof of my simplicity. Being
disposed to make large allowances for the faults of her education and
the circumstances in which she was placed, I felt most kindly disposed
towards her and took her part upon all occasions, and I was not a little
affected by learning that after she withdrew to Ireland a long and
severe illness raised her spirit as it depressed her body. This I heard
from her most intimate friends, and there is striking evidence of it in
a poem entitled [Blank; and in pencil on opposite page--Do you mean a
Sonnet entitled 'Sabbath Sonnet,' composed by Mrs. Hemans, April 26th,
1835, a few days before her death? 'How many blessed groups this hour
are wending!'] These notices of Mrs. Hemans would be very unsatisfactory
to her intimate friends, as indeed they are to myself, not so much for
what is said, but what for brevity's sake is left unsaid. Let it suffice
to add there was much sympathy between us, and if opportunity had been
allowed me to see more of her, I should have loved and valued her
accordingly. As it is, I remember her with true affection for her
amiable qualities, and above all for her delicate and irreproachable
conduct during her long separation from an unfeeling husband, whom she
had been led to marry from the romantic notions of inexperienced youth.
Upon this husband I never heard her cast the least reproach, nor did I
ever hear her even name him, though she did not forbear wholly to touch
upon her domestic position; but never so as that any fault could be
found with her manner of adverting to it.


511. _Dead friends: 'Immortals.'_ [XV.]

Walter Scott      died 21st Sept. 1832.
S.T. Coleridge     "   25th July  1834.
Charles Lamb       "   27th Dec.  1834.
Geo. Crabbe        "    3rd Feb.  1832.
Felicia Hemans     "   16th May   1835.


512. *_Ode: Intimations of Immortality, from Recollections of early
Childhood_. [Headed in I.F. MSS. 'The Ode.']

This was composed during my residence at Town-End, Grasmere. Two years
at least passed between the writing of the four first stanzas and the
remaining part. To the attentive and competent reader the whole
sufficiently explains itself, but there may be no harm in adverting here
to particular feelings or _experiences_ of my own mind on which the
structure of the poem partly rests. Nothing was more difficult for me in
childhood than to admit the notion of death as a state applicable to my
own being. I have said elsewhere

                  'A simple child
      That lightly draws its breath,
    And feels its life in every limb,
      What should it know of death?'[11]

[11] In pencil on opposite page--But this first stanza of 'We are Seven'
is Coleridge's Jem and all (Mr. Quillinan).

But it was not so much from the source of animal vivacity that _my_
difficulty came as from a sense of the indomitableness of the spirit
within me. I used to brood over the stories of Enoch and Elijah, and
almost to persuade myself that, whatever might become of others, I
should be translated in something of the same way to heaven. With a
feeling congenial to this, I was often unable to think of external
things as having external existence, and I communed with all that I saw
as something not apart from, but inherent in, my own immaterial nature.
Many times while going to school have I grasped at a wall or tree to
recall myself from this abyss of idealism to the reality. At that time I
was afraid of such processes. In later periods of life I have deplored,
as we have all reason to do, a subjugation of an opposite character,
and have rejoiced over the remembrances, as is expressed in the lines,
'Obstinate questionings,' &c. To that dreamlike vividness and splendour
which invest objects of sight in childhood, every one, I believe, if he
would look back, could bear testimony, and I need not dwell upon it
here; but having in the Poem regarded it as presumptive evidence of a
prior state of existence, I think it right to protest against a
conclusion which has given pain to some good and pious persons, that I
meant to inculcate such a belief. It is far too shadowy a notion to be
recommended to faith as more than an element in our instincts of
immortality. But let us bear in mind that, though the idea is not
advanced in Revelation, there is nothing there to contradict it, and the
fall of man presents an analogy in its favour. Accordingly, a
pre-existent state has entered into the popular creeds of many nations,
and among all persons acquainted with classic literature is known as an
ingredient in Platonic philosophy. Archimedes said that he could move
the world if he had a point whereon to rest his machine. Who has not
felt the same aspirations as regards the world of his own mind? Having
to wield some of its elements when I was impelled to write this poem on
the 'Immortality of the Soul,' I took hold of the notion of
pre-existence as having sufficient foundation in humanity for
authorising me to make for my purpose the best use of it I could as a
Poet.

       *       *       *       *       *




XXV. 'THE EXCURSION.'


513. *_On the leading Characters and Scenes of the Poem_.

Something must now be said of this Poem, but chiefly, as has been done
through the whole of these Notes, with reference to my personal friends,
and especially to her [Miss Fenwick] who has perseveringly taken them
down from my dictation. Towards the close of the 1st book, stand the
lines that were first written, beginning 'Nine tedious years,' and
ending 'last human tenant of these ruined walls.' These were composed in
1795, at Racedown; and for several passages describing the employment
and demeanour of Margaret during her affliction, I was indebted to
observations made in Dorsetshire, and afterwards at Alfoxden, in
Somersetshire, where I resided in 1797 and 1798. The lines towards the
conclusion of the 4th book, 'Despondency corrected,' beginning 'For the
man who in this spirit,' to the words 'intellectual soul,' were in order
of time composed the next, either at Racedown or Alfoxden, I do not
remember which. The rest of the poem was written in the vale of
Grasmere, chiefly during our residence at Allan Bank. The long poem on
my own education was, together with many minor poems, composed while we
lived at the cottage at Town-End. Perhaps my purpose of giving an
additional interest to these my poems, in the eyes of my nearest and
dearest friends, may he promoted by saying a few words upon the
character of the 'Wanderer,' the 'Solitary,' and the 'Pastor,' and some
other of the persons introduced. And first of the principal one, the
'Wanderer.'

My lamented friend Southey (for this is written a month after his
decease[12]) used to say that had he been a Papist, the course of life
which would in all probability have been his, was the one for which he
was most fitted and most to his mind, that of a Benedictine Monk, in a
Convent, furnished, as many once were, and some still are, with an
inexhaustible library. _Books_, as appears from many passages in his
writings, and was evident to those who had opportunities of observing
his daily life, were, in fact, _his passion_; and _wandering_, I can
with truth affirm, was mine; but this propensity in me was happily
counteracted by inability from want of fortune to fulfil my wishes.

[12] Which took place in March, 1843.

But had I been born in a class which would have deprived me of what is
called a liberal education, it is not unlikely that, being strong in
body, I should have taken to a way of life such as that in which my
'Pedlar' passed the greater part of his days. At all events, I am here
called upon freely to acknowledge that the character I have represented
in his person is chiefly an idea of what I fancied my own character
might have become in his circumstances.

Nevertheless much of what he says and does had an external existence,
that fell under my own youthful and subsequent observation.

An individual, named Patrick, by birth and education a Scotchman,
followed this humble occupation for many years, and afterwards settled
in the town of Kendal. He married a kinswoman of my wife's, and her
sister Sarah was brought up from early childhood under this good man's
eye.[13] My own imaginations I was happy to find clothed in reality, and
fresh ones suggested, by what she reported of this man's tenderness of
heart, his strong and pure imagination, and his solid attainments in
literature, chiefly religious, whether in prose or verse. At Hawkshead
also, while I was a school-boy, there occasionally resided a packman
(the name then generally given to this calling), with whom I had
frequent conversations upon what had befallen him, and what he had
observed during his wandering life, and, as was natural, we took much to
each other; and upon the subject of Pedlarism in general, as _then_
followed, and its favourableness to an intimate knowledge of human
concerns, not merely among the humbler classes of society, I need say
nothing here in addition to what is to be found in 'The Excursion,' and
a note attached to it.

[13] In pencil on opposite page--Sarah went to Kendal on our mother's
death, but Mr. P. died in the course of a year or two. M.W.

Now for the _Solitary_. Of him I have much less to say. Not long after
we took up our abode at Grasmere, came to reside there, from what motive
I either never knew or have forgotten, a Scotchman, a little past the
middle of life, who had for many years been chaplain to a Highland
regiment. He was in no respect, as far as I know, an interesting
character, though in his appearance there was a good deal that attracted
attention, as if he had been shattered in for bane, and not happy in
mind. Of his quondam position I availed myself to connect with the
'Wanderer,' also a Scotchman, a character suitable to my purpose, the
elements of which I drew from several persons with whom I had been
connected, and who fell under my observation during frequent residences
in London at the beginning of the French Revolution. The chief of these
was, one may now say, a Mr. Fawcett, a preacher at a Dissenting
meeting-house at the Old Jewry. It happened to me several times to be
one of his congregation through my connection with Mr. Nicholson of
Cateaton Street, Strand, who, at a time when I had not many
acquaintances in London, used often to invite me to dine with him on
Sundays; and I took that opportunity (Mr. N. being a Dissenter) of going
to hear Fawcett, who was an able and eloquent man. He published a poem
on War, which had a good deal of merit, and made me think more about him
than I should otherwise have done. But his Christianity was probably
never very deeply rooted; and, like many others in those times of like
shewy talents, he had not strength of character to withstand the effects
of the French Revolution, and of the wild and lax opinions which had
done so much towards producing it, and far more in carrying it forward
in its extremes. Poor Fawcett, I have been told, became pretty much such
a person as I have described, and early disappeared from the stage,
having fallen into habits of intemperance, which I have heard (though I
will not answer for the fact) hastened his death. Of him I need say no
more. There were many like him at that time, which the world will never
be without, but which were more numerous then, for reasons too obvious
to be dwelt upon.

_The Pastor_.--To what is said of the 'Pastor' in the poem, I have
little to add but what may be deemed superfluous. It has ever appeared
to me highly favourable to the beneficial influence of the Church of
England upon all gradations and classes of society, that the patronage
of its benefices is in numerous instances attached to the estates of
noble families of ancient gentry; and accordingly I am gratified by the
opportunity afforded me in 'The Excursion,' to pourtray the character of
a country clergyman of more than ordinary talents, born and bred in the
upper ranks of society so as to partake of their refinements, and at the
same time brought by his pastoral office and his love of rural life into
intimate connection with the peasantry of his native district.

To illustrate the relation which in my mind this 'Pastor' bore to the
'Wanderer,' and the resemblances between them, or rather the points of
community in their nature, I likened one to an oak, and the other to a
sycamore; and having here referred to this comparison, I need only add,
I had no one individual in my mind, wishing rather to embody this idea
than to break in upon the simplicity of it by traits of individual
character, or of any peculiarity of opinion.

And now for a few words upon the scene where these interviews and
conversations are supposed to occur.

The scene of the first book of the poem is, I must own, laid in a tract
of country not sufficiently near to that which soon comes into view in
the second book, to agree with the fact. All that relates to Margaret,
and the ruined cottage, &c., was taken from observations made in the
south-west of England, and certainly it would require more than
seven-leagued boots to stretch in one morning from a common in
Somersetshire, or Dorsetshire, to the heights of Furness Fells, and the
deep valleys they embosom. For this dealing with space, I need make, I
trust, no apology; but my friends may be amused by the truth.

In the poem, I suppose that the Pedlar and I ascended from a plain
country up the vale of Langdale, and struck off a good way above the
chapel to the western side of the Vale. We ascended the hill, and thence
looked down upon the circular recess in which lies Blea Tarn, chosen by
the 'Solitary' for his retreat. After we quit his cottage, passing over
a low ridge, we descend into another Vale, that of Little Langdale,
towards the head of which stands embowered, or partly shaded by yews and
other trees, something between a cottage and a mansion, or gentleman's
house, such as they once were in this country. This I convert into the
parsonage, and at the same time, and as by the waving of a magic wand, I
turn the comparatively confined Vale of Langdale, its tarn, and the rude
chapel which once adorned the valley, into the stately and comparatively
spacious Vale of Grasmere and its ancient parish church; and upon the
side of Loughrigg Fell, at the foot of the Lake, and looking down upon
it and the whole Vale and its accompanying mountains, the 'Pastor' is
supposed by me to stand, when at sunset he addresses his companions in
words which I hope my readers may remember,[14] or I should not have
taken the trouble of giving so much in detail the materials on which my
mind actually worked.

[14] Excursion; book the last, near the conclusion.

Now for a few particulars of _fact_, respecting the persons whose
stories are told or characters described by the different speakers. To
Margaret I have already alluded. I will add here that the lines
beginning,

    'She was a woman of a steady mind,'

and,

    'Live on earth a life of happiness,'

faithfully delineate, as far as they go, the character possessed in
common by many women whom it has been my happiness to know in humble
life; and that several of the most touching things which she is
represented as saying and doing are taken from actual observation of the
distresses and trials under which different persons were suffering,
some of them strangers to me, and others daily under my notice.

I was born too late to have a distinct remembrance of the origin of the
American war; but the state in which I represent Robert's mind to be, I
had frequent opportunities of observing at the commencement of our
rupture with France in 1793; opportunities of which I availed myself in
the story of the 'Female Vagrant,' as told in the poem on 'Guilt and
Sorrow.' The account given by the 'Solitary,' towards the close of the
second book, in all that belongs to the character of the old man, was
taken from a Grasmere pauper, who was boarded in the last house quitting
the Vale on the road to Ambleside; the character of his hostess, and all
that befell the poor man upon the mountain, belongs to Paterdale. The
woman I knew well; her name was Ruth Jackson, and she was exactly such a
person as I describe. The ruins of the old chapel, among which the old
man was found lying, may yet be traced, and stood upon the ridge that
divides Paterdale from Boardale and Martindale, having been placed there
for the convenience of both districts. The glorious appearance disclosed
above and among the mountains, was described partly from what my friend
Mr. Luff, who then lived in Paterdale, witnessed upon this melancholy
occasion, and partly from what Mrs. Wordsworth and I had seen, in
company with Sir G. and Lady Beaumont, above Hartshope Hall, in our way
from Paterdale to Ambleside.

And now for a few words upon the church, its monuments, and of the
deceased who are spoken of as lying in the surrounding churchyard. But
first for the one picture given by the 'Wanderer' of the living. In this
nothing is introduced but what was taken from Nature, and real life. The
cottage was called Hackett, and stands, as described, on the southern
extremity of the ridge which separates the two Langdales. The pair who
inhabited it were called Jonathan and Betty Yewdale. Once when our
children were ill, of whooping-cough I think, we took them for change of
air to this cottage, and were in the habit of going there to drink tea
upon fine summer afternoons; so that we became intimately acquainted
with the characters, habits, and lives of these good, and let me say, in
the main, wise people. The matron had, in her early youth, been a
servant in a house at Hawkshead, where several boys boarded, while I
was a school-boy there. I did not remember her as having served in that
capacity; but we had many little anecdotes to tell to each other of
remarkable boys, incidents, and adventures, which had made a noise in
their day in that small town. These two persons were induced afterwards
to settle at Rydal, where they both died.

_Church and Churchyard_.--The church, as already noticed, is that of
Grasmere. The interior of it has been improved lately and made warmer by
underdrawing the roof, and raising the floor; but the rude and antique
majesty of its former appearance has been impaired by painting the
rafters; and the oak benches, with a simple rail at the back dividing
them from each other, have given way to seats that have more the
appearance of pews. It is remarkable that, excepting only the pew
belonging to Rydal Hall, that to Rydal Mount, the one to the parsonage,
and, I believe, another, the men and women still continue, as used to be
the custom in Wales, to sit separate from each other. Is this practice
as old as the Reformation? and when and how did it originate? In the
Jewish synagogues, and in Lady Huntingdon's chapels, the sexes are
divided in the same way. In the adjoining churchyard greater changes
have taken place; it is now not a little crowded with tombstones; and
near the schoolhouse, which stands in the churchyard, is an ugly
structure, built to receive the hearse, which is recently come into use.
It would not be worth while to allude to this building, or the
hearse-vehicle it contains, but that the latter has been the means of
introducing a change much to be lamented in the mode of conducting
funerals among the mountains. Now, the coffin is lodged in the hearse at
the door of the house of the deceased, and the corpse is so conveyed to
the churchyard gate. All the solemnity which formerly attended its
progress, as described in this poem, is put an end to. So much do I
regret this, that I beg to be excused for giving utterance here to a
wish that, should it befall me to die at Rydal Mount, my own body may be
carried to Grasmere Church after the manner in which, till lately, that
of every one was borne to the place of sepulchre here, namely, on the
shoulders of neighbours; no house being passed without some words of a
funeral psalm being sung at the time by the attendants bearing it. When
I put into the mouth of the 'Wanderer,' 'Many precious rites and customs
of our rural ancestry are gone, or stealing from us,' 'this, I hope,
will last for ever,' and what follows, little did I foresee that the
observance and mode of proceeding which had often affected me so much
would so soon be superseded.

Having said much of the injury done to this churchyard, let me add, that
one is at liberty to look forward to a time when, by the growth of the
yew-trees thriving there, a solemnity will be spread over the place that
will in some degree make amends for the old simple character which has
already been so much encroached upon, and will be still more every year.
I will here set down, by way of memorial, that my friend Sir G.
Beaumont, having long ago purchased the beautiful piece of water called
Loughrigg Tarn, on the banks of which he intended to build, I told him
that a person in Kendal who was attached to the place wished to purchase
it. Sir George, finding the possession of no use to him, consented to
part with it, and placed the purchase-money, 20_l._, at my disposal, for
any local use which I thought proper. Accordingly, I resolved to plant
yew-trees in the churchyard; and had four pretty strong large oak
enclosures made, in each of which was planted under my own eye, and
principally, if not entirely, by my own hand, two young trees, with the
intention of leaving the one that throve best to stand. Many years
after, Mr. Barber, who will long be remembered in Grasmere, Mr.
Greenwood (the chief landed proprietor), and myself, had four other
enclosures made in the churchyard at our own expense, in each of which
was planted a tree taken from its neighbour, and they all stand thriving
admirably, the fences having been removed as no longer necessary. May
the trees be taken care of hereafter, when we are all gone; and some of
them will perhaps, at some far-distant time, rival the majesty of the
yew of Lorton, and those which I have described as growing at
Borrowdale, where they are still to be seen in grand assemblage.

And now for the persons that are selected as lying in the churchyard.
But first for the individual whose grave is prepared to receive him.

His story is here truly related. He was a schoolfellow of mine for some
years. He came to us when he was at least seventeen years of age, very
tall, robust, and full grown. This prevented him from falling into the
amusements and games of the school; consequently, he gave more time to
books. He was not remarkably bright or quick, but, by industry, he made
a progress more than respectable. His parents not being wealthy enough
to send him to college when he left Hawkshead, he became a schoolmaster,
with a view to preparing himself for holy orders. About this time he
fell in love, as related in the poem, and every thing followed as there
described, except that I do not know exactly when and where he died. The
number of youths that came to Hawkshead school from the families of the
humble yeomanry, to be educated to a certain degree of scholarship, as a
preparation for the church, was considerable; and the fortunes of those
persons in after life various of course, and some not a little
remarkable. I have now one of this class in my eye who became an usher
in a preparatory school, and ended in making a large fortune. His
manners, when he came to Hawkshead, were as uncouth as well could be;
but he had good abilities, with skill to turn them to account, and when
the master of the school to which he was usher died, he stept into his
place, and became proprietor of the establishment. He continued to
manage it with such address, and so much to the taste of what is called
high society and the fashionable world, that no school of the kind, even
till he retired, was in such high request. Ministers of State, the
wealthiest gentry, and nobility of the first rank, vied with each other
in bespeaking a place for their sons in the seminary of this fortunate
teacher. [In pencil on opposite page--Mr. Pearson.] In the solitude of
Grasmere, while living as a married man in a cottage of 8_l._ per annum
rent, I often used to smile at the tales which reached me of the
brilliant career of this quondam clown--for such in reality he was, in
manners and appearance, before he was polished a little by attrition
with gentlemen's sons trained at Hawkshead, rough and rude as many of
our families were. Not 200 yards from the cottage in Grasmere just
mentioned, to which I retired, this gentleman, who many years afterwards
purchased a small estate in the neighbourhood, is now erecting a
boat-house, with an upper story to be resorted to as an entertaining
room when he and his associates may feel inclined to take their pastime
on the Lake. Every passenger will be disgusted with the sight of this
edifice, not merely as a tasteless thing in itself, but as utterly out
of place, and peculiarly fitted, as far as it is observed (and it
obtrudes itself on notice at every point of view), to mar the beauty
and destroy the pastoral simplicity of the Vale. For my own part, and
that of my household, it is our utter detestation, standing by a shore
to which, before the high road was made to pass that way, we used daily
and hourly to repair for seclusion and for the shelter of a grove, under
which I composed many of my poems--the 'Brothers' especially; and for
this reason we gave the grove that name. 'That which each man loved and
prized in his peculiar nook of earth dies with him or is changed.' So
much for my old schoolfellow and his exploits. I will only add that, as
the foundation has twice failed, from the Lake no doubt being intolerant
of the intrusion, there is some ground for hoping that the impertinent
structure will not stand. It has been rebuilt in somewhat better taste,
and much as one wishes it away, it is not now so very unsightly. The
structure is an emblem of the man. Perseverance has conquered
difficulties, and given something of form and polish to rudeness. [In
pencil on opposite page--This boat-house, badly built, gave way, and was
rebuilt. It again tumbled, and was a third time reconstructed, but in a
better fashion than before. It is not now, _per se_, an ugly building,
however obtrusive it may be.]

The Miner, next described as having found his treasure after twice ten
years of labour, lived in Paterdale, and the story is true to the
letter. It seems to me, however, rather remarkable, that the strength of
mind which had supported him through his long unrewarded labour, did not
enable him to bear its successful issue. Several times in the course of
my life I have heard of sudden influxes of great wealth being followed
by derangement; and, in one instance, the shock of good fortune was so
great as to produce absolute idiotcy. But these all happened where there
had been little or no previous effort to acquire the riches, and
therefore such a consequence might the more naturally be expected, than
in the case of the solitary miner. In reviewing his story, one cannot
but regret that such perseverance was not sustained by a worthier
object. Archimedes leaped out of his bath and ran about the streets,
proclaiming his discovery in a transport of joy; but we are not told
that he lost either his life or his senses in consequence.

The next character, to whom the priest is led by contrast with the
resoluteness displayed by the foregoing, is taken from a person born
and bred in Grasmere, by name Dawson, and whose talents, dispositions,
and way of life, were such as are here delineated. I did not know him,
but all was fresh in memory when we settled at Grasmere in the beginning
of the century. From this point the conversation leads to the mention of
two individuals, who by their several fortunes were, at different times,
driven to take refuge at the small and obscure town of Hawkshead on the
skirt of these mountains. Their stories I had from the dear old dame
with whom, as a school-boy, and afterwards, I lodged for the space of
nearly ten years. The elder, the Jacobite, was named Drummond, and was
of a high family in Scotland; the Hanoverian Whig bore the name of
Vandeput,[15] and might, perhaps, be a descendant of some Dutchman who
had come over in the train of King William. At all events, his zeal was
such, that he ruined himself by a contest for the representation of
London or Westminster, undertaken to support his Party, and retired to
this corner of the world, selected as it had been by Drummond for that
obscurity which, since visiting the Lakes became fashionable, it has no
longer retained. So much was this region considered out of the way till
a late period, that persons who had fled from justice used often to
resort hither for concealment, and some were so bold as to not
unfrequently make excursions from the place of their retreat for the
purpose of committing fresh offences. Such was particularly the case
with two brothers of the name of Weston, who took up their abode at Old
Brathay, I think about seventy years ago. They were highwaymen, and
lived there some time without being discovered, though it was known that
they often disappeared, in a way, and upon errands, which could not be
accounted for. Their horses were noticed as being of a choice breed, and
I have heard from the Relph family, one of whom was a saddler in the
town of Kendal, that they were curious in their saddles, and housings,
and accoutrements of their horses. They, as I have heard, and as was
universally believed, were, in the end, both taken and hanged.

[15] Sir George Vandeput.

_Tall was her stature, her complexion dark, and saturnine_.--This person
lived at Town-End, and was almost our next neighbour. I have little to
notice concerning her beyond what is said in the poem. She was a most
striking instance how far a woman may surpass in talent, in knowledge,
and culture of mind, those with and among whom she lives, and yet fall
below them in Christian virtues of the heart and spirit. It seemed
almost, and I say it with grief, that in proportion as she excelled in
the one, she failed in the other. How frequently has one to observe in
both sexes the same thing, and how mortifying is the reflection!

_As on a sunny bank the tender lamb_.--The story that follows was told
to Mrs. Wordsworth and my sister, by the sister of this unhappy young
woman. Every particular was exactly as I have related. The party was not
known to me, though she lived at Hawkshead; but it was after I left
school. The clergyman who administered comfort to her in her distress I
knew well. Her sister, who told the story, was the wife of a leading
yeoman in the Vale of Grasmere, and they were an affectionate pair, and
greatly respected by every one who knew them. Neither lived to be old;
and their estate, which was, perhaps, the most considerable then in the
Vale, and was endeared to them by many remembrances of a salutary
character, not easily understood or sympathised with by those who are
born to great affluence, past to their eldest son, according to the
practice of these Vales, who died soon after he came into possession. He
was an amiable and promising youth, but was succeeded by an only
brother, a good-natured man, who fell into habits of drinking, by which
he gradually reduced his property, and the other day the last acre of it
was sold, and his wife and children, and he himself still surviving,
have very little left to live upon; which it would not, perhaps, have
been worth while to record here, but that through all trials this woman
has proved a model of patience, meekness, affectionate forbearance, and
forgiveness. Their eldest son, who through the vices of his father has
thus been robbed of an ancient family inheritance, was never heard to
murmur or complain against the cause of their distress, and is now,
deservedly, the chief prop of his mother's hopes.

BOOK VII.--The clergyman and his family described at the beginning of
this book were, during many years, our principal associates in the Vale
of Grasmere, unless I were to except our very nearest neighbours. I have
entered so particularly into the main points of their history, that I
will barely testify in prose that (with the single exception of the
particulars of their journey to Grasmere, which, however, was exactly
copied from real life in another instance) the whole that I have said of
them is as faithful to the truth as words can make it. There was much
talent in the family, and the eldest son was distinguished for poetical
talent, of which a specimen is given in my Notes to the Sonnets on the
Duddon. Once, when in our cottage at Town-End, I was talking with him
about poetry, in the course of our conversation I presumed to find fault
with the versification of Pope, of whom he was an enthusiastic admirer.
He defended him with a warmth that indicated much irritation;
nevertheless I would not abandon my point, and said, 'In compass and
variety of sound your own versification surpasses his.' Never shall I
forget the change in his countenance and tone of voice: the storm was
laid in a moment, he no longer disputed my judgment, and I passed
immediately in his mind, no doubt, for as great a critic as ever lived.
I ought to add, he was a clergyman and a well-educated man, and his
verbal memory was the most remarkable of any individual I have known,
except a Mr. Archer, an Irishman, who lived several years in this
neighbourhood, and who in this faculty was a prodigy: he afterwards
became deranged, and I fear continues so if alive.

Then follows the character of Robert Walker, for which see Nates to the
Duddon.

Next that of the _Deaf Man_, whose epitaph may be seen in the churchyard
at the head of Hawes-Water, and whose qualities of mind and heart, and
their benign influence in conjunction with his privation, I had from his
relatives on the spot.

The _Blind Man_, next commemorated, was John Gough, of Kendal, a man
known, far beyond his neighbourhood, for his talents and attainments in
natural history and science.

Of the _Infants' Grave_ next noticed, I will only say, it is an exact
picture of what fell under my own observation; and all persons who are
intimately acquainted with cottage life must often have observed like
instances of the working of the domestic affections.

_A volley thrice repeated_.--This young volunteer bore the name of
Dawson, and was younger brother, if I am not mistaken, to the prodigal
of whose character and fortunes an account is given towards the
beginning of the preceding book. The father of the family I knew well;
he was a man of literary education and [considerable] experience in
society, much beyond what was common among the inhabitants of the Vale.
He had lived a good while in the Highlands of Scotland as a manager of
iron-works at Bunaw, and had acted as clerk to one of my predecessors in
the office of distributor of stamps, when he used to travel round the
country collecting and bringing home the money due to Government in
gold, which it may be worth while to mention, for the sake of my
friends, was deposited in the cell or iron closet under the west window,
which still exists, with the iron doors that guarded the property. This,
of course, was before the time of bills and notes. The two sons of this
person had no doubt been led by the knowledge of their father to take
more delight in scholarship, and had been accustomed, in their own
minds, to take a wider view of social interests, than was usual among
their associates. The premature death of this gallant young man was much
lamented, and as an attendant upon the funeral, I myself witnessed the
ceremony, and the effect of it as described in the poems, 'Tradition
tells that in Eliza's golden days,' 'A knight came on a war-horse,' 'The
house is gone.' The pillars of the gateway in front of the mansion
remained when we first took up our abode at Grasmere. Two or three
cottages still remain which are called Nott Houses, from the name of the
gentleman (I have called him a knight) concerning whom these traditions
survive. He was the ancestor of the _Knott_ family, formerly
considerable proprietors in the district. What follows in the discourse
of the 'Wanderer,' upon the changes he had witnessed in rural life by
the introduction of machinery, is truly described from what I myself saw
during my boyhood and early youth, and from what was often told me by
persons of this humble calling. Happily, most happily, for these
mountains, the mischief was diverted from the banks of their beautiful
streams, and transferred to open and flat counties abounding in coal,
where the agency of steam was found much more effectual for carrying on
those demoralising works. Had it not been for this invention, long
before the present time, every torrent and river in this district would
have had its factory, large and populous in proportion to the power of
the water that could there be commanded. Parliament has interfered to
prevent the night-work which was carried on in these mills as actively
as during the daytime, and by necessity, still more perniciously; a sad
disgrace to the proprietors and to the nation which could so long
tolerate such unnatural proceedings.

Reviewing, at this late period, 1843, what I put into the mouths of my
interlocutors a few years after the commencement of the century, I
grieve that so little progress has been made in diminishing the evils
deplored, or promoting the benefits of education which the 'Wanderer'
anticipates. The results of Lord Ashley's labours to defer the time when
children might legally be allowed to work in factories, and his
endeavours to still further limit the hours of permitted labour, have
fallen far short of his own humane wishes, and of those of every
benevolent and right-minded man who has carefully attended to this
subject; and in the present session of Parliament (1843) Sir James
Graham's attempt to establish a course of religious education among the
children employed in factories has been abandoned, in consequence of
what might easily have been foreseen, the vehement and turbulent
opposition of the Dissenters; so that for many years to come it may be
thought expedient to leave the religious instruction of children
entirely in the hands of the several denominations of Christians in the
Island, each body to work according to its own means and in its own way.
Such is my own confidence, a confidence I share with many others of my
most valued friends, in the superior advantages, both religious and
social, which attend a course of instruction presided over and guided by
the clergy of the Church of England, that I have no doubt, that if but
once its members, lay and clerical, were duly sensible of those
benefits, their Church would daily gain ground, and rapidly, upon every
shape and fashion of Dissent; and in that case, a great majority in
Parliament being sensible of these benefits, the ministers of the
country might be emboldened, were it necessary, to apply funds of the
State to the support of education on church principles. Before I
conclude, I cannot forbear noticing the strenuous efforts made at this
time in Parliament by so many persons to extend manufacturing and
commercial industry at the expense of agricultural, though we have
recently had abundant proofs that the apprehensions expressed by the
'Wanderer' were not groundless.

    'I spake of mischief by the wise diffused,
    With gladness thinking that the more it spreads
    The healthier, the securer we become;
    Delusion which a moment may destroy!'

The Chartists are well aware of this possibility, and cling to it with
all ardour and perseverance which nothing but wiser and more brotherly
dealing towards the many on the part of the wealthy few can moderate or
remove.

BOOK IX., _towards conclusion_.

    'While from the grassy mountain's open side
    We gazed.'

The point here fixed upon in my imagination is half-way up the northern
side of Loughrigg Fell, from which the 'Pastor' and his companions are
supposed to look upwards to the sky and mountain-tops, and round the
Vale, with the Lake lying immediately beneath them.

    'But turned, not without welcome promise given
    That he would share the pleasures and pursuits
    Of yet another Summer's day, consumed
    In wandering with us.'

When I reported this promise of the 'Solitary,' and long after, it was
my wish, and I might say intention, that we should resume our wanderings
and pass the borders into his native country, where, as I hoped, he
might witness, in the society of the 'Wanderer,' some religious
ceremony--a sacrament say, in the open fields, or a preaching among the
mountains, which, by recalling to his mind the days of his early
childhood, when he had been present on such occasions in company with
his parents and nearest kindred, might have dissolved his heart into
tenderness, and so done more towards restoring the Christian faith in
which he had been educated, and, with that, contentedness and even
cheerfulness of mind, than all that the 'Wanderer' and 'Pastor' by their
several effusions and addresses had been enabled to effect. An issue
like this was in my intentions, but alas!

    ----'mid the wreck of is and was,
    Things incomplete and purposes betrayed
    Make sadder transits o'er thought's optic glass
    Than noblest objects utterly decayed.'


    Bydal Mount, June 24. 1843.
    St. John Baptist Day.

Of the 'Church' in the 'Excursion' (Book v.) we find this additional
morsel in a letter to Lady Frederick Bentinck (_Memoirs_, i. 156): 'The
Church is a very ancient structure; some persons now propose to ceil
it, a project which, as a matter of taste and feeling, I utterly
disapprove. At present, it is open to the rafters, and is accordingly
spacious, and has a venerable appearance, favourable, when one first
enters, to devotional impressions.'


514. _The Aristocracy of Nature_.

    ----'much did he see of men.' ['Excursion,' Book i. 1. 344.]

At the risk of giving a shock to the prejudices of artificial society, I
have ever been ready to pay homage to the aristocracy of nature; under a
conviction that vigorous human-heartedness is the constituent principle
of true taste. It may still, however, be satisfactory to have prose
testimony how far a Character, employed for purposes of imagination, is
founded upon general fact. I, therefore, subjoin an extract from an
author who had opportunities of being well acquainted with a class of
men, from whom my own personal knowledge emboldened me to draw this
portrait.

'We learn from Caesar and other Roman Writers, that the travelling
merchants who frequented Gaul and other barbarous countries, either
newly conquered by the Roman arms, or bordering on the Roman conquests,
were ever the first to make the inhabitants of those countries
familiarly acquainted with the Roman modes of life, and to inspire them
with an inclination to follow the Roman fashions, and to enjoy Roman
conveniences. In North America, travelling merchants from the
settlements have done and continue to do much more towards civilising
the Indian natives, than all the missionaries, Papist or Protestant, who
have ever been sent among them.

'It is farther to be observed, for the credit of this most useful class
of men, that they commonly contribute, by their personal manners, no
less than by the sale of their wares, to the refinement of the people
among whom they travel. Their dealings form them to great quickness of
wit and acuteness of judgment. Having constant occasion to recommend
themselves and their goods, they acquire habits of the most obliging
attention, and the most insinuating address. As in their peregrinations
they have opportunity of contemplating the manners of various men and
various cities, they become eminently skilled in the knowledge of the
world. _As they wander, each alone, through thinly-inhabited
districts they form habits of reflection and of sublime contemplation_.
With all these qualifications, no wonder that they should often be, in
remote parts of the country, the best mirrors of fashion, and censors of
manners; and should contribute much to polish the roughness, and soften
the rusticity of our peasantry. It is not more than twenty or thirty
years since a young man going from any part of Scotland to England, of
purpose to _carry the pack_, was considered as going to lead the life
and acquire the fortune of a gentleman. When, after twenty years'
absence, in that honourable line of employment, he returned with his
acquisitions to his native country, he was regarded as a gentleman to
all intents and purposes.' _Heron's Journey in Scotland_, Vol. i. p. 89.


515. _Eternity_.

    'Lost in unsearchable Eternity!' ['Excursion,' Book iii. 1. 112.]

Since this paragraph was composed, I have read with so much pleasure, in
Burnet's _Theory of the Earth_, a passage expressing corresponding
sentiments, excited by objects of a similar nature, that I cannot
forbear to transcribe it.

'Siquod verò Natura nobis dedit spectaculum, in hâc tellure, verè
gratum, et philosopho dignum, id semel mihi contigisse arbitror; cùm ex
celsissimâ rupe speculabundus ad oram maris Mediterranei, hinc aequor
caeruleum, illinc tractus Alpinos prospexi; nihil quidem magìs dispar
aut dissimile, nec in suo genere, magìs egregium et singulare. Hoc
theatrum ego facilè praetulerim Romanis cunctis, Graecisve; atque id
quod natura hîc spectandum exhibet, scenicis ludis omnibus, aut
amphitheatri certamiuibus. Nihil hîc elegans aut venustum, sed ingens et
magnificum, et quod placet magnitudine suâ et quâdam specie
immensitatis. Hinc intuebar maris aequabilem superficiem, usque et usque
diffusam, quantum maximùm oculorum acies ferri potuit; illinc
disruptissimam terrae faciem, et vastas moles variè elevatas aut
depressas, erectas, propendentes, reclinatas, coacervatas, omni situ
inaequali et turbido. Placuit, ex hàc parte, Naturae unitas et
simplicitas, et inexhausta quaedam planities; ex alterâ, multiformis
confusio magnorum corporum, et insanae rerum strages: quas cùm intuebar,
non urbis alicujus aut oppidi, sed confracti mundi rudera, ante oculos
habere mihi visus sum.

'In singulis ferè montibus erat aliquid insolens et mirabile, sed prae
caeteris mihi placebat illa, quâ sedebam, rupes; erat maxima et
altissima, et quâ terram respiciebat, molliori ascensu altitudinem suam
dissimulabat: quà verò mare, horrendúm praeceps, et quasi ad
perpendiculum facta, instar parietis. Praetereà facies illa marina adeò
erat laevis ac uniformis (quod in rupibus aliquando observare licet) ac
si scissa fuisset à summo ad imum, in illo plano; vel terrae motu
aliquo, aut fulmine, divulsa.

'Ima pars rupis erat cava, recessusque habuit, et saxeos specus, euntes
in vacuum montem; sive naturâ pridem factos, sive exesos mari, et
undarum crebris ictibus: In hos enim cum impetu ruebant et fragore,
aestuantis maris fluctus; quos iterum spumantes reddidit antrum, et
quasi ab imo ventre evomuit.

'Dextrum latus montis erat praeruptum, aspero saxo et nuda caute;
sinistrum non adeò neglexerat Natura, arboribus utpote ornatum: et prope
pedem montis rivus limpidae aquae prorupit; qui cùm vicinam vallem
irrigaverat, lento motu serpens, et per varios maeandros, quasi ad
protrahendam vitam, in magno mari absorptus subito periit. Denique in
summo vertice promontorii, commodè eminebat saxum, cui insidebam
contemplabundus. Vale augusta sedes, Rege digna: Augusta rupes, semper
mihi memoranda!' P. 89. _Telluris Theoria sacra, &c. Editio secunda_.


516. _'Of Mississippi, or that Northern Stream;' William Gilbert_.
['Excursion,' Book iii. l. 935.]

'A man is supposed to improve by going out into the _World_, by visiting
_London_. Artificial man does; he extends with his sphere; but, alas!
that sphere is microscopic; it is formed of minutiae, and he surrenders
his genuine vision to the artist, in order to embrace it in his ken. His
bodily senses grow acute, even to barren and inhuman pruriency; while
his mental become proportionally obtuse. The reverse is the Man of Mind:
he who is placed in the sphere of Nature and of God, might be a mock at
Tattersall's and Brooks', and a sneer at St. James's: he would certainly
be swallowed alive by the first _Pizarro_ that crossed him:--But when he
walks along the river of Amazons; when he rests his eye on the
unrivalled Andes; when he measures the long and watered savannah; or
contemplates, from a sudden promontory, the distant, vast Pacific--and
feels himself a freeman in this vast theatre, and commanding each ready
produced fruit of this wilderness, and each progeny of this stream--his
exaltation is not less than imperial. He is as gentle, too, as he is
great: his emotions of tenderness keep pace with his elevation of
sentiment; for he says, "These were made by a good Being, who, unsought
by me, placed me here to enjoy them." He becomes at once a child and a
king. His mind is in himself; from hence he argues, and from hence he
acts, and he argues unerringly, and acts magisterially: his mind in
himself is also in his God; and therefore he loves, and therefore he
soars.'--From the notes upon 'The Hurricane,' a Poem, by William
Gilbert.

The Reader, I am sure, will thank me for the above quotation, which,
though from a strange book, is one of the finest passages of modern
English prose.


517. _Richard Baxter_.

    ''Tis, by comparison, an easy task
    Earth to despise,' &c. ['Excursion,' Book iv. ll. 131-2.]

See, upon this subject, Baxter's most interesting review of his own
opinions and sentiments in the decline of life. It may be found (lately
reprinted) in Dr. Wordsworth's _Ecclesiastical Biography_.


518. _Endowment of immortal Power_.

    'Alas! the endowment of Immortal Power,' &c. ['Excursion,' Ibid. ll. 206
    _et seqq._]

This subject is treated at length in the Ode 'Intimations of
Immortality.'


519. _Samuel Daniel and Countess of Cumberland_. ['Excursion,' _ibid._
l. 326.]

    'Knowing the heart of Man is set to be,' &c.

The passage quoted from Daniel is taken from a poem addressed to the
Lady Margaret, Countess of Cumberland, and the two last lines, printed
in Italics, are by him translated from Seneca. The whole Poem is very
beautiful. I will transcribe four stanzas from it, as they contain an
admirable picture of the state of a wise Man's mind in a time of public
commotion.

    Nor is he moved with all the thunder-cracks
    Of tyrants' threats, or with the surly brow
    Of Power, that proudly sits on other's crimes;
    Charged with more crying sins than those he checks.
    The storms of sad confusion that may grow
    Up in the present for the coming times,
    Appal not him; that hath no side at all,
    But of himself, and knows the worst can fall.

    Although his heart (so near allied to earth)
    Cannot but pity the perplexed state
    Of troublous and distressed mortality,
    That thus make way unto the ugly birth
    Of their own sorrows, and do still beget
    Affliction upon Imbecility;
    Yet seeing thus the course of things must run,
    He looks thereon not strange, but as foredone.

    And whilst distraught ambition compasses,
    And is encompassed, while as craft deceives,
    And is deceived: whilst man doth ransack man,
    And builds on blood, and rises by distress;
    And th' Inheritance of desolation leaves
    To great-expecting hopes: He looks thereon,
    As from the shore of peace, with unwet eye,
    And bears no venture in Impiety.

    Thus, Lady, fares that man that hath prepared
    A rest for his desire; and sees all things
    Beneath him; and hath learned this book of man,
    Full of the notes of frailty; and compared
    The best of glory with her sufferings:
    By whom, I see, you labour all you can
    To plant your heart! and set your thoughts as near
    His glorious mansion as your powers can bear.'


520. _Spires_.

    And spires whose "silent finger points to Heaven."' ['Excursion,'
    Book vi. l. 19.]

An instinctive taste teaches men to build their churches in flat
countries with spire-steeples, which as they cannot be referred to any
other object, point as with silent finger to the sky and stars, and
sometimes, when they reflect the brazen light of a rich though rainy
sunset, appear like a pyramid of flame burning heaven-ward. See 'The
Friend,' by S. T. Coleridge, No. 14, p. 223.


521. _Sycamores_.

    'That sycamore which annually holds
    Within its shade as in a stately tent.' ['Excursion,' Book vii. ll. 622-3.]

      'This sycamore oft musical with Bees;
      _Such tents_ the Patriarch loved.' S.T. COLERIDGE.


522. _The Transitory_.

    'Perish the roses and the flowers of Kings.'
     ['Excursion,' Book vii. l. 990.]

The 'Transit gloria mundi' is finely expressed in the Introduction to
the Foundation-charters of some of the ancient Abbeys. Some expressions
here used are taken from that of the Abbey of St. Mary's, Furness, the
translation of which is as follows:

'Considering every day the uncertainty of life, that the roses and
flowers of Kings, Emperors, and Dukes, and the crowns and palms of all
the great, wither and decay; and that all things, with an uninterrupted
course, tend to dissolution and death: I therefore,' &c.


523. _Dyer and 'The Fleece.'_

     ---'Earth has lent
    Her waters, Air her breezes.' ['Excursion,' Book viii. ll. 112-3.]

In treating this subject, it was impossible not to recollect, with
gratitude, the pleasing picture, which, in his Poem of the Fleece, the
excellent and amiable Dyer has given of the influences of manufacturing
industry upon the face of this Island. He wrote at a time when machinery
was first beginning to be introduced, and his benevolent heart prompted
him to augur from it nothing but good. Truth has compelled me to dwell
upon the baneful effects arising out of an ill-regulated and excessive
application of powers so admirable in themselves.


524. _Dr. Bell_.

    'Binding herself by Statute.' ['Excursion,' Book ix. l. 300.]

The discovery of Dr. Bell affords marvellous facilities for carrying
this into effect; and it is impossible to over-rate the benefit which
might accrue to humanity from the universal application of this simple
engine under an enlightened and conscientious government.




II. LETTERS AND EXTRACTS FROM LETTERS.

NOTE.

On this division of the Prose, the Reader may see our Preface, Vol. I.
G.


1. _Autobiographical Memoranda dictated by William Wordsworth, P.L., at
Rydal Mount, November_ 1847.

I was born at Cockermouth, in Cumberland, on April 7th, 1770, the second
son of John Wordsworth, attorney-at-law, as lawyers of this class were
then called, and law-agent to Sir James Lowther, afterwards Earl of
Lonsdale. My mother was Anne, only daughter of William Cookson, mercer,
of Penrith, and of Dorothy, born Crackanthorp, of the ancient family of
that name, who from the times of Edward the Third had lived in Newbiggen
Hall, Westmoreland. My grandfather was the first of the name of
Wordsworth who came into Westmoreland, where he purchased the small
estate of Sockbridge. He was descended from a family who had been
settled at Peniston in Yorkshire, near the sources of the Don, probably
before the Norman Conquest. Their names appear on different occasions in
all the transactions, personal and public, connected with that parish;
and I possess, through the kindness of Col. Beaumont, an almery made in
1325, at the expense of a William Wordsworth, as is expressed in a Latin
inscription[16] carved upon it, which carries the pedigree of the family
back four generations from himself.


[16] The original is as follows, some of the abbreviations being
expanded: 'HOC OPUS FIEBAT ANNO DOMINI MCCCXXV EX SUMPIU WLLLELMI
WOBDESWORTH FILII W. FIL. JOH. FIL. W. FIL. NICH. VIRI ELIZABETH FILIAE
ET HEREDIS W. PROCTOR DE PENYSTON QUORUM ANIMABUS PROPITIETUE DEUS.'

On the almery are carved the letters 'I.H.S.' and 'M.;' also the emblem
of the Holy Trinity.

For further information concerning this oak press, see Mr. Hunter's
paper in _Gentleman's Magazine _for July, 1850, p. 43.

The time of my infancy and early boyhood was passed partly at
Cockermouth, and partly with my mother's parents at Penrith, where my
mother, in the year 1778, died of a decline, brought on by a cold, the
consequence of being put, at a friend's house in London, in what used to
be called 'a best bedroom.' My father never recovered his usual
cheerfulness of mind after this loss, and died when I was in my
fourteenth year, a school-boy, just returned from Hawkshead, whither I
had been sent with my elder brother Richard, in my ninth year.

I remember my mother only in some few situations, one of which was her
pinning a nosegay to my breast when I was going to say the catechism in
the church, as was customary before Easter.[17] I remember also telling
her on one week day that I had been at church, for our school stood in
the churchyard, and we had frequent opportunities of seeing what was
going on there. The occasion was, a woman doing penance in the church in
a white sheet. My mother commended my having been present, expressing a
hope that I should remember the circumstance for the rest of my life.
'But,' said I, 'Mama, they did not give me a penny, as I had been told
they would.' 'Oh,' said she, recanting her praises, 'if that was your
motive, you were very properly disappointed.'

My last impression was having a glimpse of her on passing the door of
her bedroom during her last illness, when she was reclining in her easy
chair. An intimate friend of hers, Miss Hamilton by name, who was used
to visit her at Cockermouth, told me that she once said to her, that the
only one of her five children about whose future life she was anxious,
was William; and he, she said, would be remarkable either for good or
for evil. The cause of this was, that I was of a stiff, moody, and
violent temper; so much so that I remember going once into the attics of
my grandfather's house at Penrith, upon some indignity having been put
upon me, with an intention of destroying myself with one of the foils
which I knew was kept there. I took the foil in hand, but my heart
failed. Upon another occasion, while I was at my grandfather's house at
Penrith, along with my eldest brother, Richard, we were whipping tops
together in the large drawing-room, on which the carpet was only laid
down upon particular occasions. The walls were hung round with family
pictures, and I said to my brother, 'Dare you strike your whip through
that old lady's petticoat?' He replied, 'No, I won't.' 'Then,' said I,
'here goes;' and I struck my lash through her hooped petticoat, for
which no doubt, though I have forgotten it, I was properly punished. But
possibly, from some want of judgment in punishments inflicted, I had
become perverse and obstinate in defying chastisement, and rather proud
of it than otherwise.

[17] See Ecclesiastical Sonnets, Part III. Sonnet xxii. 'On
Catechising.'

Of my earliest days at school I have little to say, but that they were
very happy ones, chiefly because I was left at liberty, then and in the
vacations, to read whatever books I liked. For example, I read all
Fielding's works, _Don Quixote, Gil Blas,_ and any part of Swift that I
liked; _Gulliver's Travels,_ and the _Tale of the Tub,_ being both much
to my taste. I was very much indebted to one of the ushers of Hawkshead
School, by name Shaw, who taught me more of Latin in a fortnight than I
had learnt during two preceding years at the school of Cockermouth.
Unfortunately for me this excellent master left our school, and went to
Stafford, where he taught for many years. It may be perhaps as well to
mention, that the first verses which I wrote were a task imposed by my
master; the subject, 'The Summer Vacation;' and of my own accord I added
others upon 'Return to School.' There was nothing remarkable in either
poem; but I was called upon, among other scholars, to write verses upon
the completion of the second centenary from the foundation of the school
in 1585, by Archbishop Sandys. These verses were much admired, far more
than they deserved, for they were but a tame imitation of Pope's
versification, and a little in his style. This exercise, however, put it
into my head to compose verses from the impulse of my own mind, and I
wrote, while yet a school-boy, a long poem running upon my own
adventures, and the scenery of the country in which I was brought up.
The only part of that poem which has been preserved is the conclusion of
it, which stands at the beginning of my collected Poems ['Dear native
regions,' &c.].

In the month of October, 1787, I was sent to St. John's College,
Cambridge, of which my uncle, Dr. Cookson, had been a fellow. The
master, Dr. Chevallier, died very soon after;[18] and, according to the
custom of that time, his body, after being placed in the coffin, was
removed to the hall of the college, and the pall, spread over the
coffin, was stuck over by copies of verses, English or Latin, the
composition of the students of St. John's. My uncle seemed mortified
when upon inquiry he learnt that none of these verses were from my pen,
'because,' said he, 'it would have been a fair opportunity for
distinguishing yourself.' I did not, however, regret that _I_ had been
silent on this occasion, as I felt no interest in the deceased person,
with whom I had had no intercourse, and whom I had never seen but during
his walks in the college grounds.

[18] He was succeeded by Dr. Craven in 1789.

When at school, I, with the other boys of the same standing, was put
upon reading the first six books of Euclid, with the exception of the
fifth; and also in algebra I learnt simple and quadratic equations; and
this was for me unlucky, because I had a full twelvemonth's start of the
freshmen of my year, and accordingly got into rather an idle way;
reading nothing but classic authors according to my fancy, and Italian
poetry. My Italian master was named Isola, and had been well acquainted
with Gray the poet. As I took to these studies with much interest, he
was proud of the progress I made. Under his correction I translated the
_Vision of Mirza_, and two or three other papers of the _Spectator_,
into Italian. In the month of August, 1790, I set off for the Continent,
in companionship with Robert Jones, a Welshman, a fellow-collegian. We
went staff in hand, without knapsacks, and carrying each his needments
tied up in a pocket handkerchief, with about twenty pounds apiece in our
pockets. We crossed from Dover and landed at Calais on the eve of the
day when the king was to swear fidelity to the new constitution: an
event which was solemnised with due pomp at Calais. On the afternoon of
that day we started, and slept at Ardres. For what seemed best to me
worth recording in this tour, see the 'Poem of my own Life.'[19]

After taking my degree in January, 1791, I went to London, stayed there
some time, and then visited my friend Jones, who resided in the Yale of
Clwydd, North Wales. Along with him I made a pedestrian tour through
North Wales, for which also see the Poem.[20]

In the autumn of 1791 I went to Paris, where I stayed some little time,
and then went to Orleans, with a view of being out of the way of my own
countrymen, that I might learn to speak the language fluently. At
Orleans, and Blois, and Paris, on my return, I passed fifteen or sixteen
months.[21] It was a stirring time. The king was dethroned when I was at
Blois, and the massacres of September took place when I was at Orleans.
But for these matters see also the Poem. I came home before the
execution of the king, and passed the subsequent time among my friends
in London and elsewhere, till I settled with my only sister at Piacedown
in Dorsetshire, in the year 1796.

[19] Prelude, book vi.

[20] Ibid, book xiv.

[21] This is not quite correct; the time of his absence did not exceed
thirteen months.

Here we were visited by Mr. Coleridge, then residing at Bristol; and for
the sake of being near him when he had removed to Nether-Stowey, in
Somersetshire, we removed to Alfoxden, three miles from that place. This
was a very pleasant and productive time of my life. Coleridge, my
sister, and I, set off on a tour to Linton and other places in
Devonshire; and in order to defray his part of the expense, Coleridge on
the same afternoon commenced his poem of the 'Ancient Mariner;' in which
I was to have borne my part, and a few verses were written by me, and
some assistance given in planning the poem; but our styles agreed so
little, that I withdrew from the concern, and he finished it himself.

In the course of that spring I composed many poems, most of which were
printed at Bristol, in one volume, by my friend Joseph Cottle, along
with Coleridge's 'Ancient Mariner,' and two or three other of his
pieces.

In the autumn of 1798, Mr. Coleridge, a friend of his Mr. Chester, my
sister, and I, crossed from Yarmouth to Hamburgh, where we remained a
few days, and saw, several times, Klopstock the poet. Mr. Coleridge and
his friend went to Ratzburg, in the north of Germany, and my sister and
I preferred going southward; and for the sake of cheapness, and the
neighbourhood of the Hartz Mountains, we spent the winter at the old
imperial city of Goslar. The winter was perishingly cold--the coldest of
this century; and the good people with whom we lodged told me one
morning, that they expected to find me frozen to death, my little
sleeping room being immediately over an archway. However, neither my
sister nor I took any harm.

We returned to England in the following spring, and went to visit our
friends the Hutchinsons, at Sockburn-on-Tees, in the county of Durham,
with whom we remained till the 19th of December. We then came, on St.
Thomas's Day, the 21st, to a small cottage at Town-End, Grasmere, which,
in the course of a tour some months previously with Mr. Coleridge, I had
been pleased with, and had hired. This we furnished for about a hundred
pounds, which sum had come to my sister by a legacy from her uncle
Crackanthorp.

I fell to composition immediately, and published, in 1800, the second
volume of the 'Lyrical Ballads.'

In the year 1802 I married Mary Hutchinson, at Brompton, near
Scarborough, to which part of the country the family had removed from
Sockburn. We had known each other from childhood, and had practised
reading and spelling under the same old dame at Penrith, a remarkable
personage, who had taught three generations, of the upper classes
principally, of the town of Penrith and its neighbourhood.

After our marriage we dwelt, together with our sister, at Town-End,
where three of our children were born. In the spring of 1808, the
increase of our family caused us to remove to a larger house, then just
built, Allan Bank, in the same vale; where our two younger children were
born, and who died at the rectory, the house we afterwards occupied for
two years. They died in 1812, and in 1813 we came to Rydal Mount, where
we have since lived with no further sorrow till 1836, when my sister
became a confirmed invalid, and our sister Sarah Hutchinson died. She
lived alternately with her brother and with us.[22]


2. _His Schoolmistress, Mrs. Anne Birkett, Penrith_.

'The old dame did not affect to make theologians, or logicians, but she
taught to read, and she practised the memory, often no doubt by rote;
but still the faculty was improved. Something perhaps she explained, and
left the rest to parents, to masters, and to the pastor of the
parish.'[23]


3. _Books and Reading_.

'Do not trouble yourself with reading modern authors at present; confine
your attention to ancient classical writers; make yourself master of
them; and when you have done that, you will come down to us; and then
you will be able to judge us according to our deserts.'[24]

[22] _Memoirs_, i. pp. 7-17.

[23] Letter to Rev. H.J. Rose (1828), _Memoirs_, i. 33.

[24] Letter to a nephew, _Memoirs_, i. 48-9.


4. _Tour on the Continent_, 1790.

LETTER TO MISS WORDSWORTH, SEPT. 6 1790.

                   Sept. 6, 1790, Keswill (a small village on the
                       Lake of Constance).

MY DEAR SISTER,

My last letter was addressed to you from St. Valier and the Grande
Chartreuse. I have, since that period, gone over a very considerable
tract of country, and I will give you a sketch of my route as far as
relates to mentioning places where I have been, after I have assured you
that I am in excellent health and spirits, and have had no reason to
complain of the contrary during our whole tour. My spirits have been
kept in a perpetual hurry of delight, by the almost uninterrupted
succession of sublime and beautiful objects which have passed before my
eyes during the course of the last mouth. I will endeavour to give you
some idea of our route. It will be utterly impossible for me to dwell
upon particular scenes, as my paper would be exhausted before I had done
with the journey of two or three days. On quitting the Grande
Chartreuse, where we remained two days, contemplating, with increased
pleasure, its wonderful scenery, we passed through Savoy to Geneva;
thence, along the Pays do Vaud side of the lake, to Villeneuve, a small
town seated at its head. The lower part of the lake did not afford us a
pleasure equal to what might have been expected from its celebrity; this
owing partly to its width, and partly to the weather, which was one of
those hot gleamy days in which all distant objects are veiled in a
species of bright obscurity. But the higher part of the lake made us
ample amends; 'tis true we had some disagreeable weather, but the banks
of the water are infinitely more picturesque, and, as it is much
narrower, the landscape suffered proportionally less from that pale
steam which before almost entirely hid the opposite shore. From
Villeneuve we proceeded up the Rhone to Martigny, where we left our
bundles, and struck over the mountains to Chamouny, and visited the
glaciers of Savoy. You have undoubtedly heard of these celebrated
scenes, but if you have not read about them, any description which I
have room to give you must be altogether inadequate. After passing two
days in the environs of Chamouny, we returned to Martigny, and pursued
our mount up the Valais, along the Rhine, to Brig. At Brig we quitted
the Valais, and passed the Alps at the Simplon, in order to visit part
of Italy. The impressions of three hours of our walk among these Alps
will never be effaced. From Duomo d'Ossola, a town of Italy which lay in
our route, we proceeded to the lake of Locarno, to visit the Boromean
Islands, and thence to Como. A more charming path was scarcely ever
travelled over. The banks of many of the Italian and Swiss lakes are so
steep and rocky as not to admit of roads; that of Como is partly of
this character. A small foot-path is all the communication by land
between one village and another, on the side along which we passed, for
upwards of thirty miles. We entered upon this path about noon, and,
owing to the steepness of the banks, were soon unmolested by the sun,
which illuminated the woods, rocks, and villages of the opposite shore.
The lake is narrow, and the shadows of the mountains were early thrown
across it. It was beautiful to watch them travelling up the side of the
hills,--for several hours to remark one half of a village covered with
shade, and the other bright with the strongest sunshine. It was with
regret that we passed every turn of this charming path, where every new
picture was purchased by the loss of another which we should never have
been tired of gazing upon. The shores of the lake consist of steeps
covered with large, sweeping woods of chestnut, spotted with villages;
some clinging from the summits of the advancing rocks, and others hiding
themselves within their recesses. Nor was the surface of the lake less
interesting than its shores; half of it glowing with the richest green
and gold, the reflection of the illuminated wood and path, shaded with a
soft blue tint. The picture was still further diversified by the number
of sails which stole lazily by us as we paused in the wood above them.
After all this we had the moon. It was impossible not to contrast that
repose, that complacency of spirit, produced by these lovely scenes,
with the sensations I had experienced two or three days before, in
passing the Alps. At the lake of Como, my mind ran through a thousand
dreams of happiness, which might be enjoyed upon its banks, if
heightened by conversation and the exercise of the social affections.
Among the more awful scenes of the Alps, I had not a thought of man, or
a single created being; my whole soul was turned to Him who produced the
terrible majesty before me. But I am too particular for the limits of my
paper.

We followed the lake of Como to its head, and thence proceeded to
Chiavenna, where we began to pass a range of the Alps, which brought us
into the country of the Grisons at Sovozza. From Sovozza we pursued the
valley of Myssen, in which it is situated, to its head; passed Mount
Adula to Hinter Rhine, a small village near one of the sources of the
Rhine. We pursued this branch of the Rhine downward through the Grisons
to Michenem, where we turned up the other branch of the same river, and
following it to Chiamut, a small village near its source. Here we
quitted the Grisons, and entered Switzerland at the valley of Urseren,
and pursued the course of the Reuss down to Altorf; thence we proceeded,
partly upon the lake and partly behind the mountains on its banks, to
Lucerne, and thence to Zurich. From Zurich, along the banks of the lake,
we continued our route to Richtenschwyl: here we left the lake to visit
the famous church and convent of Einsiedeln, and thence to Glaris. But
this catalogue must be shockingly tedious. Suffice it to say, that,
after passing a day in visiting the romantic valley of Glaris, we
proceeded by the lake of Wallenstadt and the canton of Appenzell to the
lake of Constance, where this letter was begun nine days ago. From
Constance we proceeded along the banks of the Rhine to Schaffhausen, to
view the falls of the Rhine there. Magnificent as this fall certainly
is, I must confess I was disappointed in it. I had raised my ideas too
high.

We followed the Rhine downward about eight leagues from Schaffhausen,
where we crossed it, and proceeded by Baden to Lucerne. I am at this
present moment (14th September) writing at a small village on the road
from Grindelwald to Lauterbrunnen. By consulting your maps, you will
find these villages in the south-east part of the canton of Berne, not
far from the lakes of Thun and Brientz. After viewing the valley of
Lauterbrunnen, we shall have concluded our tour of the more Alpine part
of Switzerland. We proceed thence to Berne, and intend, after making two
or three small excursions about the lake of Neufchatel, to go to Basle,
a town in Switzerland, upon the Rhine, whence we shall, if we find we
can afford it, take advantage of the river down to Cologne, and so cross
to Ostend, where we shall take the packet to Margate. To-day is the 14th
of September; and I hope we shall be in England by the 10th of October.
I have had, during the course of this delightful tour, a great deal of
uneasiness from an apprehension of your anxiety on my account. I have
thought of you perpetually; and never have my eyes burst upon a scene of
particular loveliness but I have almost instantly wished that you could
for a moment be transported to the place where I stood to enjoy it. I
have been more particularly induced to form those wishes, because the
scenes of Switzerland have no resemblance to any I have found in
England; consequently it may probably never be in your power to form an
idea of them. We are now, as I observed above, upon the point of
quitting these most sublime and beautiful parts; and you cannot imagine
the melancholy regret which I feel at the idea. I am a perfect
enthusiast in my admiration of nature in all her various forms; and I
have looked upon, and, as it were, conversed with, the objects which
this country has presented to my view so long, and with such increasing
pleasure, that the idea of parting from them oppresses me with a sadness
similar to what I have always felt in quitting a beloved friend.

There is no reason to be surprised at the strong attachment which the
Swiss have always shown to their native country. Much of it must
undoubtedly have been owing to those charms which have already produced
so powerful an effect upon me, and to which the rudest minds cannot
possibly be indifferent. Ten thousand times in the course of this tour
have I regretted the inability of my memory to retain a more strong
impression of the beautiful forms before me; and again and again, in
quitting a fortunate station, have I returned to it with the most eager
avidity, in the hope of bearing away a more lively picture. At this
moment, when many of these landscapes are floating before my mind, I
feel a high enjoyment in reflecting that perhaps scarcely a day of my
life will pass in which I shall not derive some happiness from these
images.

With regard to the manners of the inhabitants of this singular country,
the impressions which we have had often occasion to receive have been
unfavourable; but it must be remembered that we have had little to do
but with innkeepers, and those corrupted by perpetual intercourse with
strangers. Had we been able to speak the language, which is German, and
had we time to insinuate ourselves into their cottages, we should
probably have had as much occasion to admire the simplicity of their
lives as the beauties of their country. My partiality to Switzerland,
excited by its natural charms, induces me to hope that the manners of
the inhabitants are amiable; but at the same time I cannot help
frequently comparing them with those of the French, and, as far as I
have had opportunity to observe, they lose very much by the comparison.
We not only found the French a much less imposing people, but that
politeness diffused through the lowest ranks had an air so engaging that
you could scarce attribute it to any other cause than real benevolence.
During the time, which was near a month, that we were in France, we had
not once to complain of the smallest deficiency in courtesy in any
person, much less of any positive rudeness. We had also perpetual
occasion to observe that cheerfulness and sprightliness for which the
French have always been remarkable. But I must remind you that we
crossed at the time when the whole nation was mad with joy in
consequence of the Revolution. It was a most interesting period to be in
France; and we had many delightful scenes, where the interest of the
picture was owing solely to this cause. I was also much pleased with
what I saw of the Italians during the short time we were among them. We
had several times occasion to observe a softness and elegance which
contrasted strongly with the severe austereness of their neighbours on
the other side of the Alps. It was with pleasure I observed, at a small
inn on the lake of Como, the master of it playing upon his harpsichord,
with a large collection of Italian music about him. The outside of the
instrument was such that it would not much have graced an English
drawing-room; but the tones that he drew from it were by no means
contemptible.

But it is time to talk about England. When you write to my brothers, I
must beg of you to give my love, and tell them I am sorry it has not
been in my power to write to them. Kit will be surprised he has not
heard from me, as we were almost upon terms of regular correspondence. I
had not heard from Richard for some time before I set out. I did not
call upon him when I was in London; not so much because we were
determined to hurry through London, but because he, as many of our
friends at Cambridge did, would look upon our scheme as mad and
impracticable. I expect great pleasure, on my return to Cambridge, in
exulting over those of my friends who threatened us with such an
accumulation of difficulties as must undoubtedly render it impossible
for us to perform the tour. Every thing, however, has succeeded with us
far beyond my most sanguine expectations. We have, it is true, met with
little disasters occasionally, but far from distressing, and they rather
gave us additional resolution and spirits. We have both enjoyed most
excellent health; and we have been so inured to walking, that we are
become almost insensible to fatigue. We have several times performed a
journey of thirteen leagues over the most mountainous parts of
Switzerland without any more weariness than if we had been walking an
hour in the groves of Cambridge. Our appearance is singular; and we have
often observed, that, in passing through a village, we have excited a
general smile. Our coats, which we had made light on purpose for the
journey, are of the same piece; and our manner of carrying our bundles,
which is upon our heads, with each an oak stick in our hands,
contributes not a little to that general curiosity which we seem to
excite. But I find I have again relapsed into egotism, and must here
entreat you, not only to pardon this fault, but also to make allowance
for the illegible hand and desultory style of this letter. It has been
written, as you will see by its different shades, at many sittings, and
is, in fact, the produce of most of the leisure which I have had since
it was begun, and is now finally drawing to a conclusion, it being on
the 16th of September. I flatter myself still with the hope of seeing
you for a fortnight or three weeks, if it be agreeable to my uncle, as
there will be no necessity for me to be in Cambridge before the 10th of
November. I shall be better able to judge whether I am likely to enjoy
this pleasure in about three weeks. I shall probably write to you again
before I quit France; if not, most certainly immediately on my landing
in England. You will remember me affectionately to my uncle and aunt: as
he was acquainted with my giving up all thoughts of a fellowship, he
may, perhaps, not be so much displeased at this journey. I should be
sorry if I have offended him by it. I hope my little cousin is well. I
must now bid you adieu, with assuring you that you are perpetually in my
thoughts, and that I remain,

Most affectionately yours,

W. WORDSWORTH.

On looking over this letter, I am afraid you will not be able to read
half of it. I must again beg you to excuse me.

Miss Wordsworth, Rev. Wm. Cookson's, Long Stretton, Norfolk,
L'Angleterre.[25]

[25] Memoirs, pp. 57-66.


5. _In Wales_.

'You will see by the date of this letter that I am in Wales, and whether
you remember the place of Jones's residence or no, you will immediately
conclude that I am with him. I quitted London about three weeks ago,
where my time passed in a strange manner, sometimes whirled about by the
vortex of its _strenua inertia_, and sometimes thrown by the eddy into a
corner of the stream. Think not, however, that I had not many pleasant
hours.... My time has been spent since I reached Wales in a very
agreeable manner, and Jones and I intend to make a tour through its
northern counties,--on foot, as you will easily suppose.'[26]


6. _Melancholy of a Friend_.

'I regret much not to have been made acquainted with your wish to have
employed your vacation in a pedestrian tour, both on your account, as it
would have contributed greatly to exhilarate your spirits, and on mine,
as we should have gained much from the addition of your society. Such an
excursion would have served like an Aurora Borealis to gild your long
Lapland night of melancholy.'[27]

7. _Holy Orders_.

About this time Wordsworth was urged by some of his relatives to take
holy orders. Writing from Cambridge, September 23rd, to Mathews, he
says: 'I quitted Wales on a summons from Mr. Robinson, a gentleman you
most likely have heard me speak of, respecting my going into orders and
taking a curacy at Harwich; which curacy he considered as introductory
to the living. I thought it was best to pay my respects to him in
person, to inform him that I am not of age for ordination.'[28]

[26] Letter to William Mathews, _Memoirs_, i. 70.

[27] Ibid. _Memoirs_, i. 71.

[28] _Memoirs_, i. 71.


8. _The French Revolution: _1792.

'The horrors excited by the relation of the events consequent upon the
commencement of hostilities is general. Not but that there are some men
who felt a gloomy satisfaction from a measure which seemed to put the
patriot army out of a possibility of success. An ignominious flight, the
massacre of their general, a dance performed with savage joy round his
burning body, the murder of six prisoners, are events which would have
arrested the attention of the reader of the annals of Morocco.'

He then expresses his fear that the patriot army would be routed by the
invaders. But 'suppose,' he adds, 'that the German army is at the gates
of Paris, what will be the consequence? It will be impossible for it to
make any material alterations in the constitution; impossible to
reinstate the clergy in its ancient guilty splendour; impossible to
restore an existence to the noblesse similar to that it before enjoyed;
impossible to add much to the authority of the king. Yet there are in
France some (millions?)--I speak without exaggeration--who expect that
this will take place.'[29]


9. _Failure of Louvets Denunciation of Robespierre_.

At Paris his feelings were still more disturbed by the abortive issue of
Louvet's denunciation of Robespierre: he began to forebode the
commencement of the Reign of Terror; he was paralysed with sorrow and
dismay, and stung with disappointment, that no paramount spirit had
emerged to abash the impious crests of the leaders of 'the atheist
crew,' and 'to quell outrage and bloody power,' and to 'clear a passage
for just government, and leave a solid birthright to the state.'[30]

[29] Extract of letter to Mathews, May 17, 1792, _Memoirs_, i. 75.

[30] _Memoirs_, i. 76.


10. _Of inflammatory Political Opinions_.

'I disapprove of monarchical and aristocratical governments, however
modified. Hereditary distinctions, and privileged orders of every
species, I think, must necessarily counteract the progress of human
improvement. Hence it follows, that I am not among the admirers of the
British constitution. I conceive that a more excellent system of civil
policy might be established among us; yet in my ardour to attain the
goal, I do not forget the nature of the ground where the race is to be
run. The destruction of those institutions which I condemn appears to me
to be hastening on too rapidly. I recoil from the very idea of a
revolution. I am a determined enemy to every species of violence. I see
no connection, but what the obstinacy of pride and ignorance renders
necessary, between justice and the sword, between reason and bonds. I
deplore the miserable condition of the French, and think that _we_ can
only be guarded from the same scourge by the undaunted efforts of good
men.... I severely condemn all inflammatory addresses to the passions of
men. I know that the multitude walk in darkness. I would put into each
man's hands a lantern, to guide him; and not have him to set out upon
his journey depending for illumination on abortive flashes of lightning,
or the coruscations of transitory meteors.'[31]


11. _At Milkhouse, Halifax_: 'Not _to take orders_.'

'My sister,' he says, in a letter to Mathews (February 17th, 1794), 'is
under the same roof with me; indeed it was to see her that I came into
this country. I have been doing nothing, and still continue to do
nothing. What is to become of me I know not.' He announces his resolve
_not_ to take orders; and 'as for the Law, I have neither strength of
mind, purse, or constitution, to engage in that pursuit.'[32]


12. _Literary Work: Evening Walk and Descriptive Sketches_: 1794.

In May, 1794, William Wordsworth was at Whitehaven, at his uncle's, Mr.
Richard Wordsworth's; and he then proposes to his friend Mathews, who
was resident in London, that they should set on foot a monthly political
and literary Miscellany, to which, he says, 'he would communicate
critical remarks on poetry, the arts of painting, gardening, &c.,
besides essays on morals and politics.' 'I am at present,' he adds,
'nearly at leisure--I say _nearly_, for I am _not quite_ so, as I am
correcting, and considerably adding to, those poems which I published in
your absence' ('The Evening Walk' and 'Descriptive Sketches'). 'It was
with great reluctance that I sent those two little works into the world
in so imperfect a state. But as I had done nothing by which to
distinguish myself at the university, I thought these little things
might show that I _could_ do something. They have been treated with
unmerited contempt by some of the periodicals, and others have spoken in
higher terms of them than they deserve.'[33]

[31] Extract of letter to Mathews, _Memoirs_, i. 79-80.

[32] _Memoirs_, i. 82.

[33] Ibid. i. 82-3.


13. _Employment on a London Newspaper_.

Writing from Keswick on November 7th, 1794, he announces to his friend
Mathews, who _was_ employed on the newspapers, his desire and intention
of coming to London for the same purpose, and requests him to procure
for him a similar engagement. 'You say a newspaper would be glad of me.
Do you think you could ensure me employment in that way, on terms
similar to your own? I mean, also, in an Opposition paper, for I cannot
abet, in the smallest degree, the measures pursued by the present
ministry. They are already so deeply advanced in iniquity, that, like
Macbeth, they cannot retreat. When I express myself in this manner, I am
far from reprobating those whose sentiments differ from my own; I know
that many good men are persuaded of the expediency of the present war.'
He then turns to domestic matters: 'You would probably see that my
brother [afterwards the Master of Trinity] has been honoured with two
college declamation prizes. This goes towards a fellowship, which I hope
he will obtain, and am sure he will merit. He is a lad of talents, and
industrious withal. This same industry is a good old Roman quality, and
nothing is to be done without it.'[34]


14. _Raisley Culvert's last Illness_.

'My friend' [Calvert] 'has every symptom of a confirmed consumption, and
I cannot think of quitting him in his present debilitated state.'[35]
Again: 'I have been here [Mr. Somerby's, at the sign of the Robin Hood,
Penrith] for some time. I am still much engaged with my sick friend; and
sorry am I to add that he worsens daily ... he is barely alive.'[36]

[34] Memoirs, i. 85.

[35] Letter to Mathews, Nov. 9, 1794.

[36] Memoirs, i. 85-6.


15. _Family History_.

LETTER TO SIR GEORGE H. BEAUMONT, BART.
                         Grasmere, Feb. 20, 1805.

My dear friend,

My father, who was an attorney of considerable eminence, died intestate
when we were children; and the chief part of his personal property after
his decease was expended in an unsuccessful attempt to compel the late
Lord Lonsdale to pay a debt of about 5000_l._ to my father's estate.
Enough, however, was scraped together to educate us all in different
ways. I, the second son, was sent to college with a view to the
profession of the church or law; into one of which I should have been
forced by necessity, had not a friend left me 900_l._ This bequest was
from a young man with whom, though I call him friend, I had had but
little connection; and the act was done entirely from a confidence on
his part that I had powers and attainments which might be of use to
mankind. This I have mentioned, because it was his due, and I thought
the fact would give you pleasure. Upon the interest of the 900_l._,
400_l._ being laid out in annuity, with 200_l._ deducted from the
principal, and 100_l._ a legacy to my sister, and a 100_l._ more which
the 'Lyrical Ballads' have brought me, my sister and I contrived to live
seven years, nearly eight. Lord Lonsdale. then died, and the present
Lord Lowther paid to my father's estate 8500_l._ Of this sum I believe
1800_l._ apiece will come to my sister and myself; at least, would have
come: but 3000_l._ was lent out to our poor brother,[37] I mean taken
from the whole sum, which was about 1200_l._ more than his share, which
1200_l._ belonged to my sister and me. This 1200_l._ we freely lent him;
whether it was insured or no, I do not know; but I dare say it will
prove to be the case; we did not, however, stipulate for its being
insured. But you shall faithfully know all particulars as soon as I have
learned them.[38]


16. _Reading: 1795_.

Here [Racedown Lodge, near Crewkerne, Dorsetshire] he and his sister
employed themselves industriously in reading--'if reading can ever
deserve the name of industry,' says Wordsworth in a letter to his friend
Mathews of March 21, 1796.[39]

[37] Captain John Wordsworth, who perished by shipwreck a short time
before the date of this letter.

[38] _Memoirs_, i. 88-9.

[39] Ibid. i. 94.


17. _Satire: Poetical Imitations of Juvenal: 1795_.

                          LETTER TO WRANGHAM.

Nov. 7. 1806.

'I have long since come to a fixed resolution to steer clear of personal
satire; in fact, I never will have anything to do with it as far as
concerns the _private_ vices of individuals on any account. With respect
to public delinquents or offenders, I will not say the same; though I
should be slow to meddle even with these. This is a rule which I have
laid down for myself, and shall rigidly adhere to; though I do not in
all cases blame those who think and act differently.

'It will therefore follow, that I cannot lend any assistance to your
proposed publication. The verses which you have of mine I should wish to
be destroyed; I have no copy of them myself, at least none that I can
find. I would most willingly give them up to you, fame, profit, and
everything, if I thought either true fame or profit could arise out of
them.'[40]


18. _Visit to Thelwall_.

'Mr. Coleridge, my sister, and I had been visiting the famous John
Thelwall, who had taken refuge from politics after a trial for high
treason, with a view to bring up his family by the profits of
agriculture, which proved as unfortunate a speculation as that he had
fled from. Coleridge and he had been public lecturers, Coleridge
mingling with his politics theology, from which the other elocutionist
abstained, unless it were for the sake of a sneer. This quondam
community of public employment induced Thelwall to visit Coleridge, at
Nether-Stowey, where he fell in my way. He really was a man of
extraordinary talent, an affectionate husband, and a good father. Though
brought up in the City, on a tailor's board, he was truly sensible of
the beauty of natural objects. I remember once, when Coleridge, he, and
I were seated upon the turf on the brink of the stream, in the most
beautiful part of the most beautiful glen of Alfoxden, Coleridge
exclaimed, "This is a place to reconcile one to all the jarrings and
conflicts of the wide world." "Nay," said Thelwall, "to make one forget
them altogether." The visit of this man to Coleridge was, as I believe
Coleridge has related, the occasion of a spy being sent by Government to
watch our proceedings, which were, I can say with truth, such as the
world at large would have thought ludicrously harmless.'[41]

[40] _Memoirs_, i. 95-6.

[41] Ibid. i. 104-5.


19. _Poetry added to: April 12th, 1798_.

'You will be pleased to hear that I have gone on very rapidly adding to
my stock of poetry. Do come and let me read it to you under the old
trees in the park [at Alfoxden]. We have little more than two months to
stay in this place.'[42]


20. _On the Wye_.

'We left Alfoxden on Monday morning, the 26th of June, stayed with
Coleridge till the Monday following, then set forth on foot towards
Bristol. We were at Cottle's for a week, and thence we went towards the
banks of the Wye. We crossed the Severn Ferry, and walked ten miles
further to Tintern Abbey, a very beautiful ruin on the Wye. The next
morning we walked along the river through Monmouth to Goderich Castle,
there slept, and returned the next day to Tintern, thence to Chepstow,
and from Chepstow back again in a boat to Tintern, where we slept, and
thence back in a small vessel to Bristol.

'The Wye is a stately and majestic river from its width and depth, but
never slow and sluggish; you can always hear its murmur. It travels
through a woody country, now varied with cottages and green meadows, and
now with huge and fantastic rocks.'[43]


21. _At Home again_.

'We are now' (he says in a letter to Cottle) 'in the county of Durham,
just upon the borders of Yorkshire. We left Coleridge well at Gottingen
a month ago. We have spent our time pleasantly enough in Germany, but we
are right glad to find ourselves in England--for we have learnt to know
its value.'[44]


22. _Early Visit to the Lake District_.

On September 2nd [1799] Wordsworth writes from Sockburn to his friend
Cottle: 'If you come down.... I will accompany you on your tour. You
will come by Greta Bridge, which is about twenty miles from this place:
thither Dorothy and I will go to meet you.... Dorothy will return to
Sockburn, and I will accompany you into Cumberland and
Westmoreland.'[45]

[42] Letter to Cottle, _Memoirs_, i. 116.

[43] Ibid. i. 116-17.

[44] 1799: _Memoirs_, i. 145.

[45] Ibid. i. 147.


23. _On a Tour, 1799_.

'We left Cottle, as you know, at Greta Bridge. We were obliged to take
the mail over Stanemoor: the road interesting with sun and mist. At
Temple Sowerby I learned that John was at Newbiggin. I sent a note; he
came, looks very well, said he would accompany us a few days. Next day
we set off and dined at Mr. Myers', thence to Bampton, where we slept.
On Friday proceeded along the lake of Hawes-Water, a noble scene which
pleased us much. The mists hung so low that we could not go directly
over to Ambleside, so we went round by Long Sleddale to Kentmere,
Troutbeck, Rayrigg, and Bowness; ... a rainy and raw day.... Went to the
ferry, much disgusted with the new erections about Windermere; ...
thence to Hawkshead: great change among the people since we were last
there. Next day by Rydal to Grasmere, Robert Newton's. At Robert
Newton's we have remained till to-day. John left us on Tuesday: we
walked with him to the tarn. This day was a fine one, and we had some
grand mountain scenery; the rest of the week has been bad weather. The
evening before last we walked to the upper waterfall at Rydal, and saw
it through the gloom, and it was very magnificent. Coleridge was much
struck with Grasmere and its neighbourhood. I have much to say to you.
You will think my plan a mad one, but I have thought of building a house
there by the lake-side. John would give me 40_l._ to buy the ground.
There is a small house at Grasmere empty, which, perhaps, we may take;
but of this we will speak.'[46]

[46] _Memoirs_, i. 148-9.


24. _At the Lakes_.

LETTER TO COLERIDGE (1799): JOURNEY FROM SOCKBURN TO GRASMERE.

'We arrived here on the evening of St. Thomas's day, last Friday [1799],
and have now been four days in our new abode without writing to you--a
long time! but we have been in such confusion as not to have had a
moment's leisure. My dear friend, we talk of you perpetually, and for me
I see you every where. But let me be a little more methodical. We left
Sockburn last Tuesday morning. We crossed the Tees by moonlight in the
Sockburn fields, and after ten good miles' riding came in sight of the
Swale. It is there a beautiful river, with its green bank and flat holms
scattered over with trees. Four miles further brought us to Richmond,
with its huge ivied castle, its friarage steeple, its castle tower
resembling a huge steeple, and two other steeple towers, for such they
appeared to us. The situation of this place resembles that of Barnard
Castle, but I should suppose is somewhat inferior to it. George
accompanied us eight miles further, and there we parted with sorrowful
hearts. We were now in Wensley Dale, and D[orothy] and I set off side by
side to foot it as far as Kendal. I will not clog my letter with a
description of this celebrated dale; but I must not neglect to mention
that a little before sunset we reached one of the waterfalls, of which I
read you a short description in Mr. Taylor's tour. It is a singular
scene; I meant to have given you some account of it, but I feel myself
too lazy to execute the task. 'Tis such a performance as you might have
expected from some giant gardener employed by one of Queen Elizabeth's
courtiers, if this same giant gardener had consulted with Spenser, and
they two had finished the work together. By this you will understand
that it is at once formal and wild. We reached Askrigg, twelve miles,
before six in the evening, having been obliged to walk the last two
miles over hard frozen roads, to the great annoyance of our ankles and
feet. Next morning the earth was thinly covered with snow, enough to
make the road soft, and prevent its being slippery. On leaving Askrigg,
we turned aside to see another waterfall. It was a beautiful morning,
with driving snow showers, which disappeared by fits, and unveiled the
east, which was all one delicious pale orange colour. After walking
through two small fields we came to a mill, which we passed; and in a
moment a sweet little valley opened before us with an area of grassy
ground, and a stream dashing over various laminae of black rocks close
under a bank covered with firs; the bank and stream on our left, another
woody bank on our right, and the flat meadow in front, from which, as at
Buttermere the stream had retired, as it were, to hide itself under the
shade. As we walked up this delightful valley we were tempted to look
back perpetually on the stream, which reflected the orange lights of the
morning among the gloomy rocks, with a brightness varying with the
agitation of the current. The steeple of Askrigg was between us and the
east, at the bottom of the valley; it was not a quarter of a mile
distant, but oh! how far we were from it! The two banks seemed to join
before us with a facing of rock common to them both. When we reached
this bottom the valley opened out again; two rocky banks on each side,
which, hung with ivy and moss, and fringed luxuriantly with brushwood,
ran directly parallel to each other, and then approaching with a gentle
curve at their point of union, presented a lofty waterfall, the
termination of the valley. It was a keen frosty morning, showers of snow
threatening us, but the sun bright and active. We had a task of
twenty-one miles to perform in a short winter's day. All this put our
minds into such a state of excitation, that we were no unworthy
spectators of this delightful scene. On a nearer approach the waters
seemed to fall down a tall arch, or niche, that had shaped itself by
insensible moulderings in the wall of an old castle. We left this spot
with reluctance, but highly exhilarated. When we had walked about a mile
and a half, we overtook two men with a string of ponies and some empty
carts. I recommended to Dorothy to avail herself of this opportunity of
husbanding her strength: we rode with them more than two miles. 'Twas
bitter cold, the wind driving the snow behind us in the best style of a
mountain storm. We soon reached an inn at a place called Hardrane, and
descending from our vehicles, after warming ourselves by the cottage
fire, we walked up the brook-side to take a view of a third waterfall.
We had not walked above a few hundred yards between two winding rocky
banks, before we came full upon the waterfall, which seemed to throw
itself in a narrow line from a lofty wall of rock, the water, which shot
manifestly to some distance from the rock, seeming to be dispersed into
a thin shower scarcely visible before it reached the bason. We were
disappointed in the cascade itself, though the introductory and
accompanying banks were an exquisite mixture of grandeur and beauty. We
walked up to the fall; and what would I not give if I could convey to
you the feelings and images which were then communicated to me? After
cautiously sounding our way over stones of all colours and sizes,
encased in the clearest water formed by the spray of the fall, we found
the rock, which before had appeared like a wall, extending itself over
our heads, like the ceiling of a huge cave, from the summit of which the
waters shot directly over our heads into a bason, and among fragments
wrinkled over with masses of ice as white as snow, or rather, as Dorothy
says, like congealed froth. The water fell at least ten yards from us,
and we stood directly behind it, the excavation not so deep in the rock
as to impress any feeling of darkness, but lofty and magnificent; but in
connection with the adjoining banks excluding as much of the sky as
could well be spared from a scene so exquisitely beautiful. The spot
where we stood was as dry as the chamber in which I am now sitting, and
the incumbent rock, of which the groundwork was limestone, veined and
dappled with colours which melted into each other with every possible
variety of colour. On the summit of the cave were three festoons, or
rather wrinkles, in the rock, run up parallel like the folds of a
curtain when it is drawn up. Each of these was hung with icicles of
various length, and nearly in the middle of the festoon in the deepest
valley of the waves that ran parallel to each other, the stream shot
from the rows of icicles in irregular fits of strength, and with a body
of water that varied every moment. Sometimes the stream shot into the
bason in one continued current; sometimes it was interrupted almost in
the midst of its fall, and was blown towards part of the waterfall at no
great distance from our feet like the heaviest thunder-shower. In such a
situation you have at every moment a feeling of the presence of the sky.
Large fleecy clouds drove over our heads above the rush of the water,
and the sky appeared of a blue more than usually brilliant. The rocks on
each side, which, joining with the side of this cave, formed the vista
of the brook, were chequered with three diminutive waterfalls, or rather
courses of water. Each of these was a miniature of all that summer and
winter can produce of delicate beauty. The rock in the centre of the
falls, where the water was most abundant, a deep black, the adjoining
parts yellow, white, purple, and dove-colour, covered with water-plants
of the most vivid green, and hung with streaming icicles, that in some
places seem to conceal the verdure of the plants, and the violet and
yellow variegation of the rocks; and in some places render the colours
more brilliant. I cannot express to you the enchanting effect produced
by this Arabian scene of colour as the wind blew aside the great
waterfall behind which we stood, and alternately hid and revealed each
of these fairy cataracts in irregular succession, or displayed them
with various gradations of distinctness as the intervening spray was
thickened or dispersed. What a scene, too, in summer! In the luxury of
our imagination we could not help feeding upon the pleasure which this
cave, in the heat of a July noon, would spread through a frame
exquisitely sensible. That huge rock on the right, the bank winding
round on the left, with all its living foliage, and the breeze stealing
up the valley, and bedewing the cavern with the freshest imaginable
spray. And then the murmur of the water, the quiet, the seclusion, and a
long summer day.'[47]


25. _Inconsistent Opinions on his Poems_.

|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                         'HARMONIES OF CRITICISM.'                                |
|---------------------------------------|------------------------------------------|
|        '_Nutting_.'                   |         '_Nutting_.'                     |
|Mr. C.W.:                              |   'Mr. S.:                               |
|'Worth its weight in gold.'            |   'Can make neither head nor tail of it.'|
|                                       |                                          |
|        '_Joanna_.'                    |         '_Joanna_.'                      |
|                                       |                                          |
|Mr. J.W.:                              |    Mr. S.:                               |
|'The finest poem of its                |                                          |
|length you have written.'              |   'Can make nothing of it.'              |
|                                       |                                          |
|        '_Poet's Epitaph_.'            |         '_Poet's Epitaph_.'              |
|                                       |                                          |
|Mr. Charles Lamb:                      |     Mr. S.:                              |
|'The latter part preëminently          |                                          |
|good, and your own.'                   |  'The latter part very ill written.      |
|                                       |                                          |
|        '_Cumberland Beggar_.'         |        '_Cumberland Beggar_.'            |
|Mr. J.W.:                              |     Mr. Charles Lamb:                    |
|'Everybody seems delighted.'           |  'You seem to presume your readers       |
|                                       |   are stupid: the instructions too       |
|                                       |   direct.'                               |
|                                       |                                          |
|        '_Idiot Boy_.'                 |        '_Idiot Boy_.'                    |
|Mr. J.W.:                              |     Mr. S.:                              |
|'A lady, a friend of mine, could       |  'Almost thrown by it into a fit         |
|talk of nothing else: this, of all the |   with disgust; _cannot read it_!'       |
|poems, her delight.'                   |                                          |
|                                       |                                          |
|But here comes the waggon              |                                          |
|                                       |   W.W.[48]                               |
|---------------------------------------|------------------------------------------|


26. _On his Scottish Tour_.

TO SCOTT.

Grasmere, Oct. 16. 1803.

'We had a delightful journey home, delightful weather, and a sweet
country to travel through. We reached our little cottage in high
spirits, and thankful to God for all His bounties. My wife and child
were both well, and, as I need not say, we had all of us a happy
meeting.... We passed Branxholme (your Branxholme, we supposed) about
four miles on this side of Hawick. It looks better in your poem than in
its present realities. The situation, however, is delightful, and makes
amends for an ordinary mansion. The whole of the Teviot, and the
pastoral steeps about Mosspaul, pleased us exceedingly. The Esk, below
Langholm, is a delicious river, and we saw it to great advantage. We did
not omit noticing Johnnie Armstrong's Keep; but his hanging-place, to
our great regret, we missed. We were, indeed, most truly sorry that we
could not have you along with us into Westmoreland. The country was in
its full glory; the verdure of the valleys, in which we are so much
superior to you in Scotland, but little tarnished by the weather; and
the trees putting on their most beautiful looks. My sister was quite
enchanted; and we often said to each other, "What a pity Mr. Scott is
not with us!..." I had the pleasure of seeing Coleridge and Southey at
Keswick last Sunday. Southey, whom I never saw much of before, I liked
much: he is very pleasant in his manner, and a man of great reading in
old books, poetry, chronicles, memoirs, &c., particularly Spanish and
Portuguese.... My sister and I often talk of the happy days that we
spent in your company. Such things do not occur often in life. If we
live, we shall meet again; that is my consolation when I think of these
things. Scotland and England sound like division, do what we can; but we
really are but neighbours, and if you were no further off, and in
Yorkshire, we should think so. Farewell! God prosper you, and all that
belongs to you! Your sincere friend, for such I will call myself, though
slow to use a word of such solemn meaning to any one,

'W. WORDSWORTH.'[49]

[49] _Life of Scott_, by Lockhart, vol. ii. 165-7 (1856). The following
from the same source, earlier, may fitly find a place here: 'It was in
the September of this year [1803] that Scott first saw Wordsworth. Their
common acquaintance, Stoddart, had so often talked of them to each
other, that they met as if they had not been strangers; and they parted
friends. Mr. and Miss Wordsworth had just completed that tour in the
Highlands of which so many incidents have since been immortalised, both
in the poet's sense and in the hardly less poetical prose of his
sister's Diary. On the morning of the 17th of September, having left
their carriage at Rosslyn, they walked down the valley to Lasswade, and
arrived there before Mr. and Mrs. Scott had risen. "We were received,"
Mr. Wordsworth has told me, "with that frank cordiality which, under
whatever circumstances I afterwards met him, always marked his manners;
and, indeed, I found him then in every respect--except perhaps that his
animal spirits were somewhat higher--precisely the same man that you
knew him in later life; the same lively, entertaining conversation, full
of anecdote, and averse from disquisition; the same unaffected modesty
about himself; the same cheerful and benevolent and hopeful views of man
and the world. He partly read and partly recited, sometimes in an
enthusiastic style of chant, the first four cantos of the "Lay of the
Last Minstrel;" and the novelty of the manners, the clear picturesque
descriptions, and the easy glowing energy of much of the verse, greatly
delighted me."' (pp. 160-1).


27. _The Grove: Captain John Wordsworth_.

John Wordsworth left Grasmere on Michaelmas-day, 1800, walking over by
Grisedale Tarn to Paterdale, whence he would proceed to Penrith; he took
leave of his brother William, near the Tarn, where Ullswater first comes
in view; and he went to sea again, in the Abergavenny East-Indiaman, in
the spring of 1801.

After his departure from Grasmere, the Poet discovered a track which had
been worn by his brother's steps 'pacing there unwearied and alone,'
during the winter weather, in a sheltering fir-grove above the cottage,
and henceforth _that_ fir-grove was known to the Poet's household by the
name of 'John's Grove,' or 'Brother's Grove.' Of this Wordsworth writes:

'_When to the attractions of the busy world_,' 1805.--'The grove still
exists, but the plantation has been walled in, and is not so accessible
as when my brother John wore the path in the manner described. The grove
was a favourite haunt with us all while we lived at Town-End.'[50]


28. _Spenser and Milton_.

Captain Wordsworth returned from the voyage on which he sailed in 1801;
and in November 1802, he writes for directions what books to buy to
carry with him on a voyage of sixteen months....



[50] _Memoirs_, i. 282.

'Tell John' says Wordsworth, 'when he buys Spenser, to purchase an
edition which has his "State of Ireland" in it. This is in prose. This
edition may be scarce, but one surely can be found.

'Milton's Sonnets (transcribe all this for John, as said by me to him) I
think manly and dignified compositions, distinguished by simplicity and
unity of object and aim, and undisfigured by false or vicious ornaments.
They are in several places incorrect, and sometimes uncouth in language,
and, perhaps, in some, inharmonious; yet, upon the whole, I think the
music exceedingly well suited to its end, that is, it has an energetic
and varied flow of sound crowding into narrow room more of the combined
effect of rhyme and blank verse than can be done by any other kind of
verse I know. The Sonnets of Milton which I like best are that to
_Cyriack Skinner_; on his _Blindness_; _Captain or Colonel_; _Massacre
of Piedmont_; _Cromwell_, except two last lines; _Fairfax_, &c.'[51]

[51] _Memoirs_, i. 287.


29. _Death of Captain John Wordsworth_.

LETTER TO SIR GEORGE H. BEAUMONT, BART.

                          Grasmere, Feb. 11. 1805.

MY DEAR FRIEND,

The public papers will already have broken the shock which the sight of
this letter will give you: you will have learned by them the loss of the
Earl of Abergavenny East-Indiaman, and, along with her, of a great
proportion of the crew,--that of her captain, our brother, and a most
beloved brother he was. This calamitous news we received at 2 o'clock
to-day, and I write to you from a house of mourning. My poor sister, and
my wife who loved him almost as we did (for he was one of the most
amiable of men), are in miserable affliction, which I do all in my power
to alleviate; but Heaven knows I want consolation myself. I can say
nothing higher of my ever-dear brother, than that he was worthy of his
sister, who is now weeping beside me, and of the friendship of
Coleridge; meek, affectionate, silently enthusiastic, loving all quiet
things, and a poet in every thing but words.

Alas! what is human life! This present moment, I thought, this morning,
would have been devoted to the pleasing employment of writing a letter
to amuse you in your confinement. I had singled out several little
fragments (descriptions merely), which I purposed to have transcribed
from my poems, thinking that the perusal of them might give you a few
minutes' gratification; and now I am called to this melancholy office.

I shall never forget your goodness in writing so long and interesting a
letter to me under such circumstances. This letter also arrived by the
same post which brought the unhappy tidings of my brother's death, so
that they were both put into my hands at the same moment....

                         Your affectionate friend,
                                      W. WORDSWORTH.

I shall do all in my power to sustain my sister under her sorrow, which
is, and long will be, bitter and poignant. We did not love him as a
brother merely, but as a man of original mind, and an honour to all
about him. Oh! dear friend, forgive me for talking thus. We have had no
tidings of Coleridge. I tremble for the moment when he is to hear of my
brother's death; it will distress him to the heart,--and his poor body
cannot bear sorrow. He loved my brother, and he knows how we at Grasmere
loved him.


Nine days afterwards, Wordsworth resumed the subject as follows:

                       Grasmere, Feb. 20. 1805.

Having spoken of worldly affairs, let me again mention my beloved
brother. It is now just five years since, after a separation of fourteen
years (I may call it a separation, for we only saw him four or five
times, and by glimpses), he came to visit his sister and me in this
cottage, and passed eight blessed months with us. He was then waiting
for the command of the ship to which he was appointed when he quitted
us. As you will have seen, we had little to live upon, and he as little
(Lord Lonsdale being then alive). But he encouraged me to persist, and
to keep my eye steady on its object. He would work for me (that was his
language), for me and his sister; and I was to endeavour to do something
for the world. He went to sea, as commander, with this hope; his voyage
was very unsuccessful, he having lost by it considerably. When he came
home, we chanced to be in London, and saw him. 'Oh!' said he, 'I have
thought of you, and nothing but you; if ever of myself, and my bad
success, it was only on your account.' He went again to sea a second
time, and also was unsuccessful; still with the same hopes on our
account, though then not so necessary, Lord Lowther having paid the
money.[52] Lastly came the lamentable voyage, which he entered upon,
full of expectation, and love to his sister and myself, and my wife,
whom, indeed, he loved with all a brother's tenderness. This is the end
of his part of the agreement--of his efforts for my welfare! God grant
me life and strength to fulfil mine! I shall never forget him,--never
lose sight of him: there is a bond between us yet, the same as if he
were living, nay, far more sacred, calling upon me to do my utmost, as
he to the last did his utmost to live in honour and worthiness. Some of
the newspapers carelessly asserted that he did not wish to survive his
ship. This is false. He was heard by one of the surviving officers
giving orders, with all possible calmness, a very little before the ship
went down; and when he could remain at his post no longer, then, and not
till then, he attempted to save himself. I knew this would be so, but it
was satisfactory for me to have it confirmed by external evidence. Do
not think our grief unreasonable. Of all human beings whom I ever knew,
he was the man of the most rational desires, the most sedate habits, and
the most perfect self-command. He was modest and gentle, and shy even to
disease; but this was wearing off. In every thing his judgments were
sound and original; his taste in all the arts, music and poetry in
particular (for these he, of course, had had the best opportunities of
being familiar with), was exquisite; and his eye for the beauties of
nature was as fine and delicate as ever poet or painter was gifted with,
in some discriminations, owing to his education and way of life, far
superior to any person's I ever knew. But, alas! what avails it? It was
the will of God that he should be taken away.

       *       *       *       *       *

I trust in God that I shall not want fortitude; but my loss is great and
irreparable.

[52] Due to Wordsworth's father from James, Earl of Lonsdale, at whose
death, in 1802, it was paid by his Lordship's successor, and divided
among the five children.

       *       *       *       *       *

Many thanks for the offer of your house; but I am not likely to be
called to town. Lady Beaumont gives us hope we may see you next summer:
this would, indeed, be great joy to us all. My sister thanks Lady B. for
her affectionate remembrance of her and her letter, and will write as
soon as ever she feels herself able. Her health, as was to be expected,
has suffered much.

                  Your most affectionate friend,
                                 W. WORDSWORTH.

Again:

                      Grasmere, March 12. 1805.

As I have said, your last letter affected me much. A thousand times have
I asked myself, as your tender sympathy led me to do, 'why was he taken
away?' and I have answered the question as you have done. In fact, there
is no other answer which can satisfy and lay the mind at rest. Why have
we a choice, and a will, and a notion of justice and injustice, enabling
us to be moral agents? Why have we sympathies that make the best of us
so afraid of inflicting pain and sorrow, which yet we see dealt about so
lavishly by the Supreme Governor? Why should our notions of right
towards each other, and to all sentient beings within our influence,
differ so widely from what appears to be His notion and rule, _if every
thing were to end here_? Would it not be blasphemy to say that, upon the
supposition of the thinking principle being _destroyed by death_,
however inferior we may be to the great Cause and Ruler of things, we
have _more of love_ in our nature than He has? The thought is monstrous;
and yet how to get rid of it, except upon the supposition of _another_
and a _better world_, I do not see. As to my departed brother, who leads
our minds at present to these reflections, he walked all his life pure
among many impure. Except a little hastiness of temper, when any thing
was done in a clumsy or bungling manner, or when improperly contradicted
upon occasions of not much importance, he had not one vice of his
profession. I never heard an oath, or even an indelicate expression or
allusion, from him in my life; his modesty was equal to that of the
purest woman. In prudence, in meekness, in self-denial, in fortitude, in
just desires and elegant and refined enjoyments, with an entire
simplicity of manners, life, and habit, he was all that could be wished
for in man; strong in health, and of a noble person, with every hope
about him that could render life dear, thinking of, and living only for,
others,--and we see what has been his end! So good must be better; so
high must be destined to be higher.

       *       *       *       *       *

I will take this opportunity of saying, that the newspaper accounts of
the loss of the ship are throughout grossly inaccurate. The chief facts
I will state, in a few words, from the deposition at the India House of
one of the surviving officers. She struck at 5 P.M. Guns were fired
immediately, and were continued to be fired. She was gotten off the rock
at half-past seven, but had taken in so much water, in spite of constant
pumping, as to be water-logged. They had, however, hope that she might
still be run upon Weymouth Sands, and with this view continued pumping
and baling till eleven, when she went down. The longboat could not be
hoisted out, as, had that been done, there would have been no
possibility of the ship being run aground. I have mentioned these
things, because the newspaper accounts were such as tended to throw
discredit on my brother's conduct and personal firmness, stating that
the ship had struck an hour and a half before guns were fired, and that,
in the agony of the moment, the boats had been forgotten to be hoisted
out. We knew well this could not be; but, for the sake of the relatives
of the persons lost, it distressed us much that it should have been
said. A few minutes before the ship went down, my brother was seen
talking with the first mate, with apparent cheerfulness; and he was
standing on the hen-coop, which is the point from which he could
overlook the whole ship, the moment she went down, dying, as he had
lived, in the very place and point where his duty stationed him. I must
beg your pardon for detaining you so long on this melancholy subject;
and yet it is not altogether melancholy, for what nobler spectacle can
be contemplated than that of a virtuous man, with a serene countenance,
in such an overwhelming situation? I will here transcribe a passage
which I met with the other day in a review; it is from Aristotle's
'Synopsis of the Virtues and Vices.'[53] 'It is,' says he, 'the property
of fortitude not to be easily terrified by the dread of things
pertaining to death; to possess good confidence in things terrible, and
presence of mind in dangers; rather to prefer to be put to death
worthily, than to be preserved basely; and to be the cause of victory.
Moreover, it is the property of fortitude to labour and endure, and to
make valorous exertion an object of choice. Further, presence of mind, a
well-disposed soul, confidence and boldness are the attendants on
fortitude; and, besides these, industry and patience.' Except in the
circumstance of making valorous exertion an 'object _of choice_' (if the
philosopher alludes to general habits of character), my brother might
have sat for this picture; but he was of a meek and retired nature,
loving all quiet things.

[53] Vol. ix. p. 395, ed. Bekker. Oxon. 1837.

                     I remain, dear Sir George,
                          Your most affectionate friend,
                                        W. WORDSWORTH.

The following, to his friend Southey, was written the morrow after the
arrival of the sad tidings:

                         Tuesday Evening, Grasmere, 1805.

We see nothing here that does not remind us of our dear brother; there
is nothing about us (save the children, whom he had not seen) that he
has not known and loved.

If you could bear to come to this house of mourning to-morrow, I should
be for ever thankful. We weep much to-day, and that relieves us. As to
fortitude, I hope I shall show that, and that all of us will show it in
a proper time, in keeping down many a silent pang hereafter. But grief
will, as you say, and must, have its course; there is no wisdom in
attempting to check it under the circumstances which we are all of us in
here.

I condole with you, from my soul, on the melancholy account of your own
brother's situation; God grant you may not hear such tidings! Oh! it
makes the heart groan, that, with such a beautiful world as this to live
in, and such a soul as that of man's is by nature and gift of God, that
we should go about on such errands as we do, destroying and laying
waste; and ninety-nine of us in a hundred never easy in any road that
travels towards peace and quietness. And yet, what virtue and what
goodness, what heroism and courage, what triumphs of disinterested love
everywhere, and human life, after all, what is it! Surely, this is not
to be for ever, even on this perishable planet! Come to us to-morrow,
if you can; your conversation, I know, will do me good.

       *       *       *       *       *

All send best remembrances to you all.

                           Your affectionate friend,
                                     W. WORDSWORTH.

The following, to another friend, completes the sad tale:

                           Grasmere, March 16. 1805.

He wrote to us from Portsmouth, about twelve days before this disaster,
full of hopes, saying that he was to sail to-morrow. Of course, at the
time when we heard this deplorable news, we imagined that he was as far
on his voyage as Madeira. It was, indeed, a thunderstroke to us! The
language which he held was always so encouraging, saying that ships
were, in nine instances out of ten, lost by mismanagement: he had,
indeed, a great fear of pilots, and I have often heard him say, that no
situation could be imagined more distressing than that of being at the
mercy of these men. 'Oh!' said he, 'it is a joyful hour for us when we
get rid of them.' His fears, alas! were too well founded; his own ship
was lost while under the management of the pilot, whether mismanaged by
him or not, I do not know; but know for certain, which is, indeed, our
great consolation, that our dear brother did all that man could do, even
to the sacrifice of his own life. The newspaper accounts were grossly
inaccurate; indeed, that must have been obvious to any person who could
bear to think upon the subject, for they were absolutely unintelligible.
There are two pamphlets upon the subject; one a mere transcript from the
papers; the other may be considered, as to all important particulars, as
of authority; it is by a person high in the India House, and contains
the deposition of the surviving officers concerning the loss of the
ship. The pamphlet, I am told, is most unfeelingly written: I have only
seen an extract from it, containing Gilpin's deposition, the fourth
mate. From this, it appears that every thing was done that could be
done, under the circumstances, for the safety of the lives and the ship.
My poor brother was standing on the hen-coop (which is placed upon the
poop, and is the most commanding situation in the vessel) when she went
down, and he was thence washed overboard by a large sea, which sank the
ship. He was seen struggling with the waves some time afterwards, having
laid hold, it is said, of a rope. He was an excellent swimmer; but what
could it avail in such a sea, encumbered with his clothes, and exhausted
in body, as he must have been!

For myself, I feel that there is something cut out of my life which
cannot be restored. I never thought of him but with hope and delight: we
looked forward to the time, not distant, as we thought, when he would
settle near us, when the task of his life would be over, and he would
have nothing to do but reap his reward. By that time, I hoped also that
the chief part of my labours would be executed, and that I should be
able to show him that he had not placed a false confidence in me. I
never wrote a line without a thought of its giving him pleasure: my
writings, printed and manuscript, were his delight, and one of the chief
solaces of his long voyages. But let me stop: I will not be cast down;
were it only for his sake, I will not be dejected. I have much yet to
do, and pray God to give me strength and power: his part of the
agreement between us is brought to an end, mine continues; and I hope
when I shall be able to think of him with a calmer mind, that the
remembrance of him dead will even animate me more than the joy which I
had in him living. I wish you would procure the pamphlet I have
mentioned; you may know the right one, by its having a motto from
Shakspeare, from Clarence's dream. I wish you to see it, that you may
read G.'s statement, and be enabled, if the affair should ever be
mentioned in your hearing, to correct the errors which they must have
fallen into who have taken their ideas from the newspaper accounts. I
have dwelt long, too long I fear, upon this subject, but I could not
write to you upon any thing else, till I had unburthened my heart. We
have great consolations from the sources you allude to; but, alas! we
have much yet to endure. Time only can give us regular tranquillity. We
neither murmur nor repine, but sorrow we must; we should be senseless
else.[54]

[54] _Memoirs_, i. 288-98.


30. _Of Dryden_.

LETTER TO SIR WALTER SCOTT.[55]

[55] From Lockhart's _Life of Scott_, vol. ii. pp. 287-9 (edit. 1856).

                           Paterdale, Nov. 7. 1803.

MY DEAR SCOTT,

I was much pleased to hear of your engagement with Dryden: not that he
is, as a poet, any great favourite of mine. I admire his talents and
genius highly, but his is not a poetical genius. The only qualities I
can find in Dryden that are _essentially_ poetical, are a certain ardour
and impetuosity of mind, with an excellent ear. It may seem strange that
I do not add to this, great command of language. _That_ he certainly
has, and of such language too, as it is most desirable that a poet
should possess, or rather, that he should not be without. But it is not
language that is, in the highest sense of the word, poetical, being
neither of the imagination nor of the passions; I mean the amiable, the
ennobling, or the intense passions. I do not mean to say that there is
nothing of this in Dryden, but as little, I think, as is possible,
considering how much he has written. You will easily understand my
meaning, when I refer to his versification of 'Palamon and Arcite,' as
contrasted with the language of Chaucer. Dryden had neither a tender
heart nor a lofty sense of moral dignity. Whenever his language is
poetically impassioned, it is mostly upon unpleasing subjects, such as
the follies, vices, and crimes of classes of men, or of individuals.
That his cannot be the language of imagination, must have necessarily
followed from this,--that there is not a single image from Nature in the
whole body of his works; and in his translation from Virgil, whenever
Virgil can be fairly said to have his _eye_ upon his object, Dryden
always spoils the passage.

But too much of this; I am glad that you are to be his editor. His
political and satirical pieces may be greatly benefited by illustration,
and even absolutely require it. A correct text is the first object of an
editor; then such notes as explain difficult or obscure passages; and
lastly, which is much less important, notes pointing out authors to whom
the Poet has been indebted, not in the fiddling way of phrase here and
phrase there (which is detestable as a general practice), but where he
has had essential obligations either as to matter or manner.

If I can be of any use to you, do not fail to apply to me. One thing I
may take the liberty to suggest, which is, when you come to the fables,
might it not be advisable to print the whole of the Tales of Boccace in
a smaller type in the original language? If this should look too much
like swelling a book, I should certainly make such extracts as would
show where Dryden has most strikingly improved upon, or fallen below,
his original. I think his translations from Boccace are the best, at
least the most poetical, of his poems. It is many years since I saw
Boccace, but I remember that Sigismunda is not married by him to
Guiscard (the names are different in Boccace in both tales, I believe,
certainly in Theodore, &c.). I think Dryden has much injured the story
by the marriage, and degraded Sigismunda's character by it. He has also,
to the best of my remembrance, degraded her still more, by making her
love absolute sensuality and appetite; Dryden had no other notion of the
passion. With all these defects, and they are very gross ones, it is a
noble poem. Guiscard's answer, when first reproached by Tancred, is
noble in Boccace, nothing but this: _Amor puà molto più che ne roi ne io
possiamo_. This, Dryden has spoiled. He says first very well, 'The
faults of love by love are justified,' and then come four lines of
miserable rant, quite _à la Maximin_. Farewell, and believe me ever,

                           Your affectionate friend,
                           WILLIAM WORDSWORTH.


31. _Of Marmion_.

EXTRACT OF LETTER TO SIR WALTER SCOTT (1808).

Thank you for 'Marmion.' I think your end has been attained. That it is
not the end which I should wish you to propose to yourself, you will be
well aware, from what you know of my notions of composition, both as to
matter and manner. In the circle of my acquaintance it seems as well
liked as the 'Lay,' though I have heard that in the world it is not so.
Had the Poem been much better than the Lay, it could scarcely have
satisfied the public, which has too much of the monster, the moral
monster, in its composition. The Spring has burst out upon us all at
once, and the vale is now in exquisite beauty; a gentle shower has
fallen this morning, and I hear the thrush, who has built in my orchard,
singing amain. How happy we should be to see you here again! Ever, my
dear Scott, your sincere friend,

                           W. W.[56]


32. _Topographical History_, &_c_.

LETTER TO REV. FRANCIS WRANGHAM, HUNMANBY, NEAR BRIDLINGTON, YORKSHIRE.

                           Grasmere, Oct. 2. 1808.

MY DEAR WRANGHAM,

In what are you employed--I mean by way of amusement and relaxation from
your professional duties? Is there any topographical history of your
neighbourhood? I remember reading White's _Natural History and
Antiquities of Selbourne_ with great pleasure, when a boy at school, and
I have lately read Dr. Whitaker's _History of Craven and Whalley_, both
with profit and pleasure. Would it not be worth your while to give some
of your leisure hours to a work of this kind, making those works partly
your model, and adding thereto from the originality of your own mind?

With your activity you might produce something of this kind of general
interest, taking for your limit any division in your neighbourhood,
natural, ecclesiastical, or civil: suppose, for example, the coast from
the borders of Cleveland, or from Scarborough, to Spurnhead; and inward
into the country to any boundary that you might approve of. Pray think
of this. I am induced to mention it from belief that you are admirably
qualified for such a work; that it would pleasantly employ your leisure
hours; and from a regret in seeing works of this kind, which might be
made so very interesting, utterly marred by falling into the hands of
wretched bunglers, _e.g._ the _History of Cleveland_, which I have just
read, by a Clergyman of ----, the most heavy performance I ever
encountered; and what an interesting district! Pray let me hear from you
soon.

                           Affectionately and sincerely yours,
                                         W. WORDSWORTH.[57]

[56] Lockhart's _Life_, iii. 45-6.

[57] _Memoirs_, i. 385-6.


33. _The War in Spain: Benefactors of Mankind, &c._

TO THE SAME.

                           Grasmere, Dec. 3. 1808.

MY DEAR WRANGHAM,

On the other side you have the prospectus of a weekly essay intended to
be published by your friend Coleridge.

       *       *       *       *       *

Your Sermon did not reach me till the night before last; we have all
read it, and are much pleased with it. Upon the whole, I like it better
than the last: it must have been heard with great interest. I differ,
however, from you in a few particulars. 1st. The Spaniards 'devoting
themselves for an imprisoned Bourbon, or the crumbling relics of the
Inquisition.' This is very fair for pointing a sentence, but it is not
the truth. They have told us over and over again, that they are
_fighting against a foreign tyrant_, who has dealt with them most
perfidiously and inhumanly, who must hate them for their worth, and on
account of the injuries they have received from him, and whom they must
hate accordingly; _against_ a ruler over whom they could have no
control, and _for_ one whom they have told us they will establish as a
sovereign of a _free_ people, and therefore must he himself be a limited
monarch. You will permit me to make to you this representation for its
truth's sake, and because it gives me an opportunity of letting out a
secret, viz. that I myself am very deep in this subject, and about to
publish upon it, first, I believe, in a newspaper, for the sake of
immediate and wide circulation; and next, the same matter in a separate
pamphlet, under the title of 'The Convention of Cintra brought to the
test of principles, and the people of Great Britain vindicated from the
charge of having prejudged it.' You will wonder to hear me talk of
principles when I have told you that I also do not go along with you in
your sentiments respecting the Roman Catholic question. I confess I am
not prepared to see the Roman Catholic religion as the Established
Church of Ireland; and how that can be consistently refused to them, if
other things are granted on the plea of their being the majority, I do
not see. Certainly this demand will follow, and how would it be
answered?

There is yet another circumstance in which I differ from you. If Dr.
Bell's plan of education be of that importance which it appears to be
of, it cannot be a matter of indifference whether he or Lancaster have a
rightful claim to the invention. For Heaven's sake let all benefactors
of their species have the honour due to them. Virgil gives a high place
in Elysium to the improvers of life, and it is neither the least
philosophical or least poetical passage of the _Aeneid_.[58] These
points of difference being stated, I may say that in other things I
greatly approve both of the matter and manner of your Sermon.

Do not fail to return my best thanks to the lady to whom I am obliged
for the elegant and accurate drawing of Broughton Church. I should have
written to thank her and you for it immediately, but I foresaw that I
should have occasion to write to you on this or other business.

All here desire their best remembrances; and believe me (in great haste,
for I have several other letters to write on the same subject),
affectionately yours,

W. WORDSWORTH.[59]

[58] 'Quique sui memores alios fecere merendo.' _Aen_. vi. 664.

[59] _Memoirs_, i. 386-8.

34. _The Convention of Cintra: the Roman Catholics_.

TO THE SAME.

                           Workington, April 8. 1809.

MY DEAR WRANGHAM,

You will think I am afraid that I have used you ill in not replying
sooner to your last letter; particularly as you were desirous to be
informed in what newspaper my Pamphlet was printing. I should not have
failed to give you immediately any information upon this subject which
could be of use; but in fact, though I began to publish in a newspaper,
viz. the '_Courier_, an accidental loss of two or three sheets of the
manuscript prevented me from going on in that mode of publication after
two sections had appeared. The Pamphlet will be out in less than a
fortnight, entitled, at full length, 'Concerning the relations of Great
Britain, Spain, and Portugal, to each other, and to the common enemy at
this crisis, and specifically as affected by the Convention of Cintra;
the whole brought to the test of those principles by which alone the
independence and freedom of nations can be preserved or recovered.' This
is less a Title than a Table of Contents. I give it you at full length
in order that you may set your fancy at work (if you have no better
employment for it) upon what the Pamphlet may contain. I sent off the
last sheets only a day or two since, else I should have written to you
sooner; it having been my intention to pay my debt to you the moment I
had discharged this debt to my country. What I have written has been
done according to the best light of my conscience: it is indeed very
imperfect, and will, I fear, be little read; but if it is read, cannot,
I hope, fail of doing some good; though I am aware it will create me a
world of enemies, and call forth the old yell of Jacobinism. I have not
sent it to any personal friends as such, therefore I have made no
exception in your case. I have ordered it to be sent to two, the Spanish
and Portuguese Ambassadors, and three or four other public men and
Members of Parliament, but to nobody of my friends and relations. It is
printed with my name, and, I believe, will be published by Longman.... I
am very happy that you have not been inattentive to my suggestion on the
subject of Topography. When I ventured to recommend the pursuit to you,
I did not for a moment suppose that it was to interfere with your
appropriate duties as a parish priest; far otherwise: but I know you are
of an active mind, and I am sure that a portion of your time might be
thus employed without any deduction from that which was due to your
professional engagements. It would be a recreation to you; and also it
does appear to me that records of this kind ought to be executed by
somebody or other, both for the instruction of those now living and for
the sake of posterity; and if so, the duty devolves more naturally upon
clergymen than upon other persons, as their opportunities and
qualifications are both likely to be better than those of other men. If
you have not seen White's and Whitaker's books do procure a sight of
them.

I was aware that you would think me fair game upon the Roman Catholic
question; but really I should be greatly obliged to any man who would
help me over the difficulty I stated. If the Roman Catholics, upon the
plea of their being the majority merely (which implies an admission on
our part that their profession of faith is in itself as good as ours, as
consistent with civil liberty), if they are to have their requests
accorded, how can they be refused (consistently) the further prayer of
being constituted, upon the same plea, the Established Church? I
confess I am not prepared for this. With the Methodists on one side and
the Catholics on the other, what is to become of the poor church and the
people of England? to both of which I am most tenderly attached, and to
the former not the less so, on account of the pretty little spire of
Broughton Parish Church, under which you and I were made happy men by
the gift from Providence of two excellent wives. To Mrs. Wrangham,
present my cordial regards, and believe me, dear Wrangham, your very

                           Sincere and affectionate friend,
                                       W. WORDSWORTH.[60]


35. _The Tractate on 'The Convention of Cintra.'_

LETTER TO LORD LONSDALE.

                           Grasmere, May 25 [1809].

MY LORD,

I had also another reason for deferring this acknowledgment to your
Lordship, viz. that at the same time I wished to present to you a Tract
which I have lately written, and which I hope you have now received. It
was finished, and ought to have appeared, two months ago, but has been
delayed by circumstances (connected with my distance from the press)
over which I had no control. If this Tract should so far interest your
Lordship as to induce you to peruse it, I do not doubt that it will be
thoughtfully and candidly judged by you; in which case I fear no
censure, but that which every man is liable to who, with good
intentions, may have occasionally fallen into error; while at the same
time I have an entire confidence that the principles which I have
endeavoured to uphold must have the sanction of a mind distinguished,
like that of your Lordship, for regard to morality and religion, and the
true dignity and honour of your country.

       *       *       *       *       *

May I beg of your Lordship to present my respectful compliments to Lady
Lonsdale.

                           I have the honour to be, my Lord,
                              Your Lordship's most obedient servant,
                                      W. WORDSWORTH.[61]

[60] _Memoirs_, i. 388-90.

[61] _Ibid_, i. 390-1.


36. _Of 'The Convention of Cintra,' &c._


LETTER TO SOUTHEY.

MY DEAR SOUTHEY,[62]

[62] Mr. Southey's opinions on the Convention of Cintra, at the time of
its ratification, were in unison with those of his friend. See Southey's
_Correspondence_, vol. iii. p. 177-180.

Col. Campbell, our neighbour at G., has sent for your book; he served
during the whole of the Peninsular war, and you shall hear what he says
of it in _due course_. We are out of the way of all literary
communication, so I can report nothing. I have read the whole with great
pleasure; the work will do you everlasting honour. I have said _the
whole_, forgetting, in that contemplation, my feelings upon one part,
where you have tickled with a feather when you should have branded with
a red-hot iron. You will guess I mean the Convention of Cintra. My
detestation, I may say abhorrence, of that event is not at all
diminished by your account of it. Buonaparte had committed a capital
blunder in supposing that when he had _intimidated_ the _Sovereigns_ of
Europe he had _conquered_ the several _Nations_. Yet it was natural for
a wiser than he was to have fallen into this mistake; for the old
despotisms had deprived the body of the people of all practical
knowledge in the management, and, of necessity, of all interest, in the
course of affairs. The French themselves were astonished at the apathy
and ignorance of the people whom they had supposed they had utterly
subdued, when they had taken their fortresses, scattered their armies,
entered their capital cities, and struck their cabinets with dismay.
There was no hope for the deliverance of Europe till the nations had
suffered enough to be driven to a passionate recollection of all that
was honourable in their past history, and to make appeal to the
principles of universal and everlasting justice. These sentiments, the
authors of that Convention most unfeelingly violated; and as to the
principles, they seemed to be as little aware even of the existence of
such powers, for powers emphatically may they be called, as the tyrant
himself. As far, therefore, as these men could, they put an extinguisher
upon the star which was then rising. It is in vain to say that after the
first burst of indignation was over, the Portuguese themselves were
reconciled to the event, and rejoiced in their deliverance. We may
infer from that the horror which they must have felt in the presence of
their oppressors; and we may see in it to what a state of helplessness
their bad government had reduced them. Our duty was to have treated them
with respect as the representatives of suffering humanity beyond what
they were likely to look for themselves, and as deserving greatly, in
common with their Spanish brethren, for having been the first to rise
against the tremendous oppression, and to show how, and how only, it
could be put an end to.

WM. WORDSWORTH.[63]


37. _Home at Grasmere: 'The Parsonage.'_


'The house which I have for some time occupied is the Parsonage of
Grasmere. It stands close by the churchyard [where his two children were
buried], and I have found it absolutely necessary that we should quit a
place which, by recalling to our minds at every moment the losses we
have sustained in the course of the last year [1811-12] would grievously
retard our progress toward that tranquillity which it is our duty to aim
at.'[64]


38. _On Education of the Young_.


LETTER TO PROFESSOR HAMILTON, OBSERVATORY, DUBLIN.

Lowther Castle, Sunday Mor[ning] [Sept. 26, 1830].

MY DEAR MR. HAMILTON,

I profit by the frank in which the letter for your sister will be
enclosed, to thank you for yours of the 11th, and the accompanying
spirited and elegant verses. You ask many questions, kindly testifying
thereby the interest you take in us and our neighbourhood. Most probably
some of them are answered in my daughter's letter to Miss E.H. I will,
however, myself reply to one or two at the risk of repeating what she
may have said. 1st. Mrs. Hemans has not sent us any tidings of her
movements and intentions since she left us; so I am unable to tell you
whether she mean to settle in Edinburgh or London.

[63] _Memoirs_, i. 391-8.

[64] Letter to Lord Lonsdale, Jan. 8. 1813: _Memoirs_, ii. 2.

She said she would write as soon as she could procure a frank. That
accommodation is, I suppose, more rare in Scotland than at this season
in our neighbourhood. I assure you the weather has been so unfavourable
to out-door amusements since you left us (not but that we have had a
sprinkling of fine and bright days), that little or no progress has been
made in the game of the Graces; and I fear that amusement must be
deferred till next summer, if we or anybody else are to see another. Mr.
Barber has dined with us once, and my sister and Mrs. Marshall, of
Halsteads, have seen his palace and grounds; but I cannot report upon
the general state of his temper. I believe he continues to be enchanted,
as far as decayed health will allow, with a Mr. Cooper, a clergyman who
has just come to the living of Hawkshend (about five miles from
Ambleside). Did I tell you that Professor Wilson, with his two sons and
daughter, have been, and probably still are, at Elleray? He heads the
gaieties of the neighbourhood, and has presided as steward at two
regattas. Do these employments come under your notions of action opposed
to contemplation? Why should they not? Whatever the high moralists may
say, the political economists will, I conclude, approve them as setting
capital afloat, and giving an impulse to manufacture and handicrafts;
but I speak of the improvement which may come thence to navigation and
nautical science. I have dined twice along with my brother (who left us
some time ago) in the Professor's company--at Mrs. Watson's, widow of
the Bp., at Calgarth, and at Mr. Bolton's. Poor Mr. B.! he must have
been greatly shocked at the fatal accident that put an end to his friend
Huskisson's earthly career. There is another acquaintance of mine also
recently gone--a person for whom I never had any love, but with whom I
had for a short time a good deal of intimacy. I mean Hazlitt, whose
death you may have seen announced in the papers. He was a man of
extraordinary acuteness, but perverse as Lord Byron himself; whose life
by Galt I have been skimming since I came here. Galt affects to be very
profound, though [he] is in fact a very shallow fellow,--and perhaps the
most illogical writer that these illogical days have produced. His
'buts' and his 'therefores' are singularly misapplied, singularly even
for this unthinking age. He accuses Mr. Southey of pursuing Lord B----
with _rancour_. I should like a reference to what Mr. S---- has written
of Lord B----, to ascertain whether this charge be well founded. I
trust it is not, both from what I know of my friend, and for the
aversion which Mr. G---- has expressed towards the Lakers, whom in the
plenitude of his ignorance he is pleased to speak of as a _class_ or
_school_ of Poets.

Now for a word on the serious part of your letter. Your views of action
and contemplation are, I think, just. If you can lay your hands upon Mr.
Coleridge's 'Friend,' you will find some remarks of mine upon a letter
signed, if I recollect right, 'Mathetes,' which was written by Professor
Wilson, in which, if I am not mistaken, sentiments like yours are
expressed. At all events, I am sure that I have long retained those
opinions, and have frequently expressed them either by letter or
otherwise. One thing, however, is not to be forgotten concerning active
life--that a personal independence must be provided for; and in some
cases more is required--ability to assist our friends, relations, and
natural dependents. The party are at breakfast, and I must close this
wretched scrawl, which pray excuse.

                           Ever faithfully yours,
                               WM. WORDSWORTH.[65]

[65] _Memoirs_, i. 433, with important additions from the MS. G.

Pray continue to write at your leisure. How could I have forgot so long
to thank you for your obliging present, which I shall value on every
account?


39. _Roman Catholics: Bible Society, &c._


LETTER TO ARCHDEACON WRANGHAM.

                           Grasmere, March 27 [1811].

MY DEAR WRANGHAM,

Your last letter, which I have left so long unanswered, found me in a
distressed state of mind, with one of my children lying nearly, as I
thought, at the point of death. This put me off answering your
letter....

You return to the R. Catholic Question. I am decidedly of opinion that
no further concessions should be made. The R. Catholic Emancipation is a
mere pretext of ambitious and discontented men. Are you prepared for the
next step--a R. Catholic Established Church? I confess I dread the
thought.

As to the Bible Society, my view of the subject is as follows:--1st.
Distributing Bibles is a good thing. 2ndly. More Bibles will be
distributed in consequence of the existence of the Bible Society;
therefore, so far as that goes, the existence of the Bible Society is
good. But, 3rdly, as to the _indirect_ benefits expected from it, as
producing a golden age of unanimity among Christians, all that I think
fume and emptiness; nay, far worse. So deeply am I persuaded that
discord and artifice, and pride and ambition, would be fostered by such
an approximation and unnatural alliance of sects, that I am inclined to
think the evil thus produced would more than outweigh the good done by
dispersing the Bibles. I think the last fifty or sixty pages of my
brother's pamphlet[66] merit the serious consideration of all persons of
the Established Church who have connected themselves with the sectaries
for this purpose....

Entreating your pardon for my long delay in answering your letter, let
me conclude with assuring you that I remain, with great truth, your
affectionate friend,

W. WORDSWORTH.[67]

[66] _Reasons for declining to become a Subscriber to the British and
Foreign Bible Society_, by Christopher Wordsworth, D.D., Dean of
Bocking. Lond. 1810. See also his _Letter to Lord Teignmouth_ in
vindication of the above Letter. Lond. 1810.

[67] _Memoirs_, ii. 8-9.


40. _Death of Children: Politics, &c._


                    Rydal Mount, near Ambleside, Aug. 28, 1813.

MY DEAR WRANGHAM,

Your letter arrived when I was on the point of going from home on
business. I took it with me, intending to answer it upon the road, but I
had not courage to undertake the office on account of the inquiries it
contains concerning my family. I will be brief on this melancholy
subject. In the course of the last year I have lost two sweet children,
a girl and a boy, at the ages of four and six and a half. These
innocents were the delight of our hearts, and beloved by everybody that
knew them. They were cut off in a few hours--one by the measles, and the
other by convulsions; dying, one half a year after the other. I quit
this sorrowful subject, secure of your sympathy as a father and as my
friend.

       *       *       *       *       *

My employment I find salutary to me, and of consequence in a pecuniary
point of view, as my literary employments bring me no remuneration, nor
promise any. As to what you say about the Ministry, I very much prefer
the course of their policy to that of the Opposition; especially on two
points most near my heart: resistance of Buonaparte by force of arms,
and their adherence to the principles of the British Constitution in
withholding political power from the Roman Catholics. My most determined
hostility shall always be directed against those statesmen who, like
Whitbread, Grenville, and others, would crouch to a sanguinary tyrant;
and I cannot act with those who see no danger to the Constitution in
introducing papists into Parliament. There are other points of policy in
which I deem the Opposition grievously mistaken, and therefore I am at
present, and long have been, by principle, a supporter of ministers, as
far as my little influence extends. With affectionate wishes for your
welfare and that of your family, and with best regards to Mrs. Wrangham,
I am, my dear friend,

                    Faithfully yours,
                          W. WORDSWORTH.[68]

[68] _Memoirs_, ii. 9-10.


41. _Letter of Introduction: Humour_.


TO ARCHDEACON WRANGHAM.

                    Rydal Mount, near Kendal, April 26. 1814.

MY DEAR WRANGHAM,

I trouble you with this in behalf of a very deserving young clergyman of
the name of Jameson, who is just gone from this neighbourhood to a
curacy at Sherbourne, in the neighbourhood of Ferry Bridge. He has a
mother and a younger brother dependent upon his exertions, and it is his
wish to take pupils in order to increase his income, which, as he is a
curate, you know, cannot but be small. He is an excellent young man, a
good scholar, and likely to become much better, for he is extremely
industrious. Among his talents I must mention that for drawing, in which
he is a proficient.... Now my wish is that, if it fall in your way, you
would vouchsafe him your patronage....

Of course, you cannot speak for him directly till you have seen him;
but, might he be permitted to refer to you, you could have no objection
to say that you were as yet ignorant of his merits as to your own
knowledge, but that 'your _esteemed_ friend Mr. Wordsworth, that
_popular_ poet, stamp-collector for Westmoreland, &c., had recommended
him strenuously to you as in all things deserving.'

A portion of a long poem[69] from me will see the light ere long; I hope
it will give you pleasure. It is serious, and has been written with
great labour....

I mean to make a tour in Scotland with Mrs. W---- and her sister, Miss
Hutchinson. I congratulate you on the overthrow of the execrable despot,
and the complete triumph of the _war faction_, of which noble body I
have the honour to be as active a member as my abilities and industry
would allow. Best remembrances to yourself and Mrs. Wrangham,

                    And believe me affectionately yours,
                                 W. WORDSWORTH.[70]

42. _The Peninsular War_.

LETTER TO ROBERT SOUTHEY, ESQ.

                    ----, 1827.

MY DEAR SIR,

Edith thanked you, in my name, for your valuable present of the
'Peninsular War.' I have read it with great delight: it is beautifully
written, and a most interesting story. I did not notice a single
sentiment or opinion that I could have wished away but one--where you
support the notion that, if the Duke of Wellington had not lived and
commanded, Buonaparte must have continued the master of Europe. I do not
object to this from any dislike I have to the Duke, but from a
conviction--I trust, a philosophic one--that Providence would not allow
the upsetting of so diabolical a system as Buonaparte's to depend upon
the existence of any individual. Justly was it observed by Lord
Wellesley, that Buonaparte was of an order of minds that created for
themselves great reverses. He might have gone further, and said that it
is of the nature of tyranny to work to its own destruction.[71]


[69] 'The Excursion,' published 1814.

[70] _Memoirs_, ii 10-11.

[71] As has been said by Demosthenes.

The sentence of yours which occasioned these loose remarks is, as I
said, the only one I objected to, while I met with a thousand things to
admire. Your sympathy with the great cause is every where energetically
and feelingly expressed. What fine fellows were Alvarez and Albuquerque;
and how deeply interesting the siege of Gerona!

I have not yet mentioned dear Sir George Beaumont.[72] His illness was
not long; and he was prepared by habitually thinking on his latter end.
But it is impossible not to grieve for ourselves, for his loss cannot be
supplied. Let dear Edith stay as long as you can; and when she must go,
pray come for her, and stay a few days with us. Farewell.

                    Ever most affectionately yours,
                                 W. W----.[73]

[72] Who died Feb. 7, 1827.

[73] _Memoirs_, ii. 20-1.


43._Of the Writings of Southey_.

LETTER TO G. HUNTLY GORDON, ESQ.
                    Rydal Mount, May 14. 1829.

Mr. Southey means to present me (as usual) his 'Colloquies,' &c. There
is, perhaps, not a page of them that he did not read me in MS.; and
several of the Dialogues are upon subjects which we have often
discussed. I am greatly interested with much of the book; but upon its
effect as a whole I can yet form no opinion, as it was read to me as it
happened to be written. I need scarcely say that Mr. Southey ranks very
highly, in my opinion, as a prose writer. His style is eminently clear,
lively, and unencumbered, and his information unbounded; and there is a
moral ardour about his compositions which nobly distinguishes them from
the trading and factious authorship of the present day. He may not
improbably be our companion in Wales next year. At the end of this month
he goes, with his family, to the Isle of Man for sea-air; and said, if I
would accompany him, and put off the Welsh tour for another year, he
would join our party. Notwithstanding the inducement, I could not bring
myself to consent; but as things now are, I shall remind him of the hope
he held out.

                    Believe me, very faithfully, yours,
                                WM. WORDSWORTH.

There is no probability of my being in town this season. I have a
horror of smoking; and nothing but a necessity for health's sake could
reconcile me to it in William.[74]

[74] _Memoirs_, ii. 22.


44. _Of alleged Changes in Political Opinions_.

LETTER TO A FRIEND, 1821.

In the year 1821 (October 7) an old friend of Wordsworth thus writes to
him: 'They tell me you have changed your opinions upon many subjects
respecting which we used to think alike; but I am persuaded we shall
neither of us change those great principles which ought to guide us in
our conduct, and lead us to do all the good we can to others. And I am
much mistaken if we should not find many things to talk about without
disturbing ourselves with political or party disputes.'

To this Wordsworth answered as follows:

                    Rydal Mount, Dec. 4. 1821.

MY DEAR L----,

Your letter ought to have been much earlier acknowledged, and would have
been so, had I not been sure you would ascribe my silence to its true
cause, viz. procrastination, and not to indifference to your kind
attention. There was another feeling which both urged and indisposed me
to write to you,--I mean the allusion which, in so friendly a manner,
you make to a supposed change in my political opinions. To the
scribblers in pamphlets and periodical publications who have heaped so
much obloquy upon myself and my friends Coleridge and Southey, I have
not condescended to reply, nor ever shall; but to you, my candid and
enlightened friend, I will say a few words on this subject, which, if we
have the good fortune to meet again, as I hope we may, will probably be
further dwelt upon.

I should think that I had lived to little purpose if my notions on the
subject of government had undergone no modification: my youth must, in
that case, have been without enthusiasm, and my manhood endued with
small capability of profiting by reflection. If I were addressing those
who have dealt so liberally with the words renegade, apostate, &c., I
should retort the charge upon them, and say, _you_ have been deluded by
_places_ and _persons_, while I have stuck to _principles_. _I_
abandoned France and her rulers when _they_ abandoned the struggle for
liberty, gave themselves up to tyranny, and endeavoured to enslave the
world. I disapproved of the war against France at its commencement,
thinking, which was, perhaps, an error, that it might have been avoided;
but after Buonaparte had violated the independence of Switzerland, my
heart turned against him, and against the nation that could submit to be
the instrument of such an outrage. Here it was that I parted, in
feeling, from the Whigs, and to a certain degree united with their
adversaries, who were free from the delusion (such I must ever regard
it) of Mr. Fox and his party, that a safe and honourable peace was
practicable with the French nation, and that an ambitious conqueror like
Buonaparte could be softened down into a commercial rival.

In a determination, therefore, to aim at the overthrow of that
inordinate ambition by war, I sided with the ministry, not from general
approbation of their conduct, but as men who thought right on this
essential point. How deeply this question interested me will be plain to
any one who will take the trouble of reading my political sonnets, and
the tract occasioned by the 'Convention of Cintra,' in which are
sufficient evidences of my dissatisfaction with the mode of conducting
the war, and a prophetic display of the course which it would take if
carried on upon the principles of justice, and with due respect for the
feelings of the oppressed nations.

This is enough for foreign politics, as influencing my attachments.

There are three great domestic questions, viz. the liberty of the press,
parliamentary reform, and Roman Catholic concession, which, if I briefly
advert to, no more need be said at present.

A free discussion of public measures through the press I deem the _only_
safeguard of liberty: without it I have neither confidence in kings,
parliaments, judges, or divines: they have all in their turn betrayed
their country. But the press, so potent for good, is scarcely less so
for evil; and unfortunately they who are misled and abused by its means
are the persons whom it can least benefit. It is the fatal
characteristic of their disease to reject all remedies coming from the
quarter that has caused or aggravated the malady. I am _therefore_ for
vigorous restrictions; but there is scarcely any abuse that I would not
endure rather than sacrifice, or even endanger, this freedom.

When I was young (giving myself credit for qualities which I did not
possess, and measuring mankind by that standard) I thought it derogatory
to human nature to set up property in preference to person as a title
for legislative power. That notion has vanished. I now perceive many
advantages in our present complex system of representation which
formerly eluded my observation; this has tempered my ardour for reform:
but if any plan could be contrived for throwing the representation
fairly into the hands of the property of the country, and not leaving it
so much in the hands of the large proprietors as it now is, it should
have my best support; though even in that event there would be a
sacrifice of personal rights, independent of property, that are now
frequently exercised for the benefit of the community.

Be not startled when I say that I am averse to further concessions to
the Roman Catholics. My reasons are, that such concessions will not
produce harmony among the Roman Catholics themselves; that they among
them who are most clamorous for the measure care little about it but as
a step, first, to the overthrow of the Protestant establishment in
Ireland, as introductory to a separation of the two countries--their
ultimate aim; that I cannot consent to take the character of a religion
from the declaration of powerful professors of it disclaiming doctrines
imputed to that religion; that, taking its character from what it
_actually teaches to the great mass_, I believe the Roman Catholic
religion to be unchanged in its doctrines and unsoftened in its
spirit,--how can it be otherwise unless the doctrine of Infallibility be
given up? that such concessions would set all other dissenters in
motion--an issue which has never fairly been met by the friends to
concession; and deeming the Church Establishment not only a fundamental
part of our constitution, but one of the greatest upholders and
propagators of civilization in our own country, and, lastly, the most
effectual and main support of religious Toleration, I cannot but look
with jealousy upon measures which must reduce her relative influence,
unless they be accompanied with arrangements more adequate than any yet
adopted for the preservation and increase of that influence, to keep
pace with the other powers in the community.

I do not apologise for this long letter, the substance of which you may
report to any one worthy of a reply who, in your hearing, may animadvert
upon my political conduct. I ought to have added, perhaps, a word on
_local politics_, but I have not space; but what I should have said may
in a great measure be deduced from the above.

                    I am, my dear L----,
                     Yours, &c. &c.,
                        W.W.[75]

[75] _Memoirs_, ii. 23-27.


45. _Of his Poems and others_.

LETTER TO BERNARD BARTON.

                    Rydal Mount, near Ambleside, Jan. 12. 1816.

DEAR SIR,

Though my sister, during my absence, has returned thanks in my name for
the verses which you have done me the honour of addressing to me, and
for the obliging letter which accompanies them, I feel it incumbent on
me, on my return home, to write a few words to the same purpose, with my
own hand.

It is always a satisfaction to me to learn that I have given pleasure
upon _rational_ grounds; and I have nothing to object to your poetical
panegyric but the occasion which called it forth. An admirer of my
works, zealous as you have declared yourself to be, condescends too much
when he gives way to an impulse proceeding from the ----, or indeed from
any other Review. The writers in these publications, while they
prosecute their inglorious employment, cannot be supposed to be in a
state of mind very favourable for being affected by the finer influences
of a thing so pure as genuine poetry; and as to the instance which has
incited you to offer me this tribute of your gratitude, though I have
not seen it, I doubt not but that it is a splenetic effusion of the
conductor of that Review, who has taken a perpetual retainer from his
own incapacity to plead against my claims to public approbation.

I differ from you in thinking that the only poetical lines in your
address are 'stolen from myself.' The best verse, perhaps, is the
following:

    'Awfully mighty in his impotence,'

which, by way of repayment, I may he tempted to steal from you on some
future occasion.

It pleases, though it does not surprise me, to learn that, having been
affected early in life by my verses, you have returned again to your old
loves after some little infidelities, which you were shamed into by
commerce with the scribbling and chattering part of the world. I have
heard of many who upon their first acquaintance with my poetry have had
much to get over before they could thoroughly relish it; but never of
one who having once learned to enjoy it, had ceased to value it, or
survived his admiration. This is as good an external assurance as I can
desire, that my inspiration is from a pure source, and that my
principles of composition are trustworthy.

With many thanks for your good wishes, and begging leave to offer mine
in return,

                    I remain,
                     Dear Sir,
                     Respectfully yours,
                        WM. WORDSWORTH.[76]

[76] _Memoirs_, ii. 52-4.

Bernard Barton, Esq., Woodbridge, Suffolk.


46. _Of the Thanksgiving Ode and 'White Doe of Rylston.'_

LETTER TO ROBERT SOUTHEY.

                    1816.
MY DEAR SOUTHEY,

I am much of your mind in respect to my Ode. Had it been a hymn,
uttering the sentiments of a _multitude_, a _stanza_ would have been
indispensable. But though I have called it a 'Thanksgiving Ode,'
strictly speaking it is not so, but a poem, composed, or supposed to be
composed, on the morning of the thanksgiving, uttering the sentiments of
an _individual_ upon that occasion. It is a _dramatised ejaculation_;
and this, if any thing can, must excuse the irregular frame of the
metre. In respect to a _stanza_ for a grand subject designed to be
treated comprehensively, there are great objections. If the stanza be
short, it will scarcely allow of fervour and impetuosity, unless so
short, as that the sense is run perpetually from one stanza to another,
as in Horace's Alcaics; and if it be long, it will be as apt to generate
diffuseness as to check it. Of this we have innumerable instances in
Spenser and the Italian poets. The sense required cannot he included in
one given stanza, so that another whole stanza is added, not
unfrequently, for the sake of matter which would naturally include
itself in a very few lines.

If Gray's plan be adopted, there is not time to become acquainted with
the arrangement, and to recognise with pleasure the recurrence of the
movement.

Be so good as to let me know where you found most difficulty in
following me. The passage which I most suspect of being misunderstood
is,

    'And thus is missed the sole true glory;'

and the passage, where I doubt most about the reasonableness of
expecting that the reader should follow me in the luxuriance of the
imagery and the language, is the one that describes, under so many
metaphors, the spreading of the news of the Waterloo victory over the
globe. Tell me if this displeased you.

Do you know who reviewed 'The White Doe,' in the _Quarterly_? After
having asserted that Mr. W. uses his words without any regard to their
sense, the writer says, that on no other principle can he explain that
Emily is _always_ called 'the consecrated Emily.' Now, the name Emily
occurs just fifteen times in the poem; and out of these fifteen, the
epithet is attached to it _once_, and that for the express purpose of
recalling the scene in which she had been consecrated by her brother's
solemn adjuration, that she would fulfil her destiny, and become a soul,

    'By force of sorrows high
    Uplifted to the purest sky
    Of undisturbed mortality.'

The point upon which the whole moral interest of the piece hinges, when
that speech is closed, occurs in this line,

    'He kissed the consecrated maid;'

and to bring back this to the reader, I repeated the epithet.

The service I have lately rendered to Burns' genius[77] will one day be
performed to mine. The quotations, also, are printed with the most
culpable neglect of correctness: there are lines turned into nonsense.
Too much of this. Farewell!

                   Believe me affectionately yours,
                          W. WORDSWORTH.[78]

[77] See his 'Letter to a Friend of Burns.'

[78] _Memoirs_, ii. 60-1.


_47. Of Poems in Stanzas_.

LETTER TO ROBERT SOUTHEY.

DEAR SOUTHEY,

       *       *       *       *       *

My opinion in respect to _epic poetry_ is much the same as the critic
whom Lucien Buonaparte has quoted in his preface. _Epic_ poetry, of the
highest class, requires in the first place an action eminently
influential, an action with a grand or sublime train of consequences; it
next requires the intervention and guidance of beings superior to man,
what the critics I believe call _machinery_; and, lastly, I think with
Dennis, that no subject but a religious one can answer the demand of the
soul in the highest class of this species of poetry. Now Tasso's is a
religious subject, and in my opinion, a most happy one; but I am
confidently of opinion that the _movement_ of Tasso's poem rarely
corresponds with the essential character of the subject; nor do I think
it possible that written in _stanzas_ it should. The celestial movement
cannot, I think, be kept up, if the sense is to be broken in that
despotic manner at the close of every eight lines. Spenser's stanza is
infinitely finer than the _ottaca rhima_, but even Spenser's will not
allow the epic movement as exhibited by Homer, Virgil, and Milton. How
noble is the first paragraph of the _Aeneid_ in point of sound, compared
with the first stanza of the _Jerusalem Delivered_! The one winds with
the majesty of the Conscript Fathers entering the Senate House in solemn
procession; and the other has the pace of a set of recruits shuffling on
the drill-ground, and receiving from the adjutant or drill-serjeant the
commands to halt at every ten or twenty steps. Farewell.

                   Affectionately yours,
                       W. WORDSWORTH.[79]

[79] _Memoirs_, ii. 62-3.


48. _The Classics: Translation of Aeneid, &c._

[Laodamia, Dion, &c.] These poems were written in 1814-16. About this
time Wordsworth's attention was given to the education of his eldest
son: this occupation appears to have been the occasion of their
composition. In preparing his son for his university career, he
reperused the principal Latin poets; and doubtless the careful study of
their works was not without a beneficial influence on his own. It
imparted variety and richness to his conceptions, and shed new graces on
his style, and rescued his poems from the charge of mannerism.

Among the fruits of this course of reading, was a translation of some of
the earlier books of VIRGIL'S AENEID. Three books were finished. This
version was not executed in blank verse, but in rhyme; not, however, in
the style of Pope, but with greater freedom and vigour. A specimen of
this translation was contributed by Wordsworth to the _Philological
Museum_, printed at Cambridge in 1832.[80] It was accompanied with the
following letter from the author:--


TRANSLATION OF PART OF THE FIRST BOOK OF THE AENEID.[81]

_To the editor off the Philological Museum_.

Your letter reminding me of an expectation I some time since held out to
you, of allowing some specimens of my translation from the _Aeneid_ to
be printed in the _Philological Museum_, was not very acceptable; for I
had abandoned the thought of ever sending into the world any part of
that experiment--for it was nothing more--an experiment begun for
amusement, and, I now think, a less fortunate one than when I first
named it to you. Having been displeased, in modern translations, with
the additions of incongruous matter, I began to translate with a resolve
to keep clear of that fault, by adding nothing; but I became convinced
that a spirited translation can scarcely be accomplished in the English
language without admitting a principle of compensation. On this point,
however, I do not wish to insist; and merely send the following passage,
taken at random, from a wish to comply with your request.

                                      W.W.[82]

[80] Vol. i. p. 382.

[81] _Philological Museum_, edit. Camb. 1832, vol. i. p. 382.

[82] _Memoirs_, ii. 68-9.


49. _On the same: Letters to Earl Lonsdale_.

MY LORD,

Many thanks for your obliging letter. I shall be much gratified if you
happen to like my translation, and thankful for any remarks with which
you may honour me. I have made so much progress with the second book,
that I defer sending the former till that is finished. It takes in many
places a high tone of passion, which I would gladly succeed in
rendering. When I read Virgil in the original I am moved; but not so
much so by the translation; and I cannot but think this owing to a
defect in the diction, which I have endeavoured to supply, with what
success you will easily be enabled to judge.

                   Ever, my Lord,
                    Most faithfully your obliged friend and servant,
                                      WM. WORDSWORTH.[83]

                   Feb. 5 [1829].

MY LORD,

I am truly obliged by your friendly and frank communication. May I beg
that you would add to the favour, by marking with a pencil some of the
passages that are faulty, in your view of the case? We seem pretty much
of opinion upon the subject of rhyme. Pentameters, where the sense has a
close of some sort at every two lines, may be rendered in regularly
closed couplets; but hexameters (especially the Virgilian, that run the
lines into each other for a great length) cannot. I have long been
persuaded that Milton formed his blank verse upon the model of the
_Georgics_ and the _Aeneid_, and I am so much struck with this
resemblance, that I should have attempted Virgil in blank verse, had I
not been persuaded that no ancient author can be with advantage so
rendered. Their religion, their warfare, their course of action and
feeling, are too remote from modern interest to allow it. We require
every possible help and attraction of sound, in our language, to smooth
the way for the admission of things so remote from our present concerns.
My own notion of translation is, that it cannot be too literal, provided
three faults be avoided: _baldness_, in which I include all that takes
from dignity; and _strangeness_ or _uncouthness_, including harshness;
and lastly, attempts to convey meanings which, as they cannot be given
but by languid circumlocutions, cannot in fact be said to be given at
all. I will trouble you with an instance in which I fear this fault
exists. Virgil, describing Aeneas's voyage, third book, verse 551,
says--

    'Hinc sinus Herculei, si vera est fama. Tarenti
    Cernitur.'

[83] _Memoirs_, ii. 69.

I render it thus:

    'Hence we behold the bay that bears the name
    Of proud Tarentum, proud to share the fame
    Of Hercules, though by a dubious claim.'

I was unable to get the meaning with tolerable harmony into fewer words,
which are more than to a modern reader, perhaps, it is worth.

I feel much at a loss, without the assistance of the marks which I have
requested, to take an exact measure of your Lordship's feelings with
regard to the diction. To save you the trouble of reference, I will
transcribe two passages from Dryden; first, the celebrated appearance of
Hector's ghost to Aeneas. Aeneas thus addresses him:

    'O light of Trojans and support of Troy,
    Thy father's champion, and thy country s joy,
    O long expected by thy friends, from whence
    Art thou returned, so late for our defence?
    Do we behold thee, wearied as we are
    With length of labours and with toils of war?
    After so many funerals of thy own,
    Art thou restored to thy declining town?'

This I think not an unfavourable specimen of Dryden's way of treating
the solemnly pathetic passages. Yet, surely, here is _nothing_ of the
_cadence_ of the original, and little of its spirit. The second verse is
not in the original, and ought not to have been in Dryden; for it
anticipates the beautiful hemistich,

    'Sat patriae Priamoque datum.'

By the by, there is the same sort of anticipation in a spirited and
harmonious couplet preceding:

    'Such as he was when by _Pelides slain_
    Thessalian coursers dragged him o'er the plain.'

This introduction of Pelides here is not in Virgil, because it would
have prevented the effect of

    'Redit exuvias indutus Achillei.'

There is a striking solemnity in the answer of Pantheus to Aeneas:

    'Venit summa dies et ineluctabile tempus
    Dardaniae: fuimus Troës, fuit Ilium, et ingens
    Gloria Teucrorum,' &c.

Dryden thus gives it:

          'Then Pantheus, with a groan,
    Troy is no more, and Ilium was a town.
    The fatal day, the appointed hour is come
    When wrathful Jove's irrevocable doom
    Transfers the Trojan state to Grecian hands.
    The fire consumes the town, the foe commands.'

My own translation runs thus; and I quote it because it occurred to my
mind immediately on reading your Lordship's observations:

          'Tis come, the final hour,
    Th' inevitable close of Dardan power
    Hath come! we _have_ been Trojans, Ilium _was_,
    And the great name of Troy; now all things pass
    To Argos. So wills angry Jupiter.
    Amid a burning town the Grecians domineer.'

I cannot say that '_we have been_,' and 'Ilium _was_,' are as sonorous
sounds as 'fuimus,' and 'fuit;' but these latter must have been as
familiar to the Romans as the former to ourselves. I should much like to
know if your Lordship disapproves of my translation here. I have one
word to say upon ornament. It was my wish and labour that my translation
should have far more of the _genuine_ ornaments of Virgil than my
predecessors. Dryden has been very careless of these, and profuse of his
own, which seem to me very rarely to harmonise with those of Virgil; as,
for example, describing Hector's appearance in the passage above alluded
to,

    'A _bloody shroud_, he seemed, and _bath'd_ in tears.
    I wept to see the _visionary_ man.'

Again,

    'And all the wounds he for his country bore
    Now streamed afresh, and with _new purple ran_.'

I feel it, however, to be too probable that my translation is deficient
in ornament, because I must unavoidably have lost many of Virgil's, and
have never without reluctance attempted a compensation of my own. Had I
taken the liberties of my predecessors, Dryden especially, I could have
translated nine books with the labour that three have cost me. The third
book, being of a humbler character than either of the former, I have
treated with rather less scrupulous apprehension, and have interwoven a
little of my own; and, with permission, I will send it, ere long, for
the benefit of your Lordship's observations, which really will be of
great service to me if I proceed. Had I begun the work fifteen years
ago, I should have finished it with pleasure; at present, I fear it will
take more time than I either can or ought to spare. I do not think of
going beyond the fourth book.

As to the MS., be so kind as to forward it at your leisure to me, at Sir
George Beaumont's, Coleorton Hall, near Ashby, whither I am going in
about ten days. May I trouble your Lordship with our respectful
compliments to Lady Lonsdale?

    Believe [me] ever
    Your Lordship's faithful
    And obliged friend and servant,
    WM. WORDSWORTH.[84]

[84] _Memoirs_, ii. 69-74.


50. _Tour on the Continent, 1820_.

LETTERS TO THE EARL OF LONSDALE.

                   Lucerne, Aug. 19. 1820.
MY LORD,

You did me the honour of expressing a wish to hear from me during my
continental tour; accordingly, I have great pleasure in writing from
this place, where we arrived three days ago. Our route has lain through
Brussels, Namur, along the banks of the Meuse, to Liege; thence to
Aix-la-Chapelle, Cologne, and along the Rhine to Mayence, to Frankfort,
Heidelberg (a noble situation, at the point where the Neckar issues from
steep lofty hills into the plain of the Rhine), Carlsruhe, and through
the Black Forest to Schaffhausen; thence to Zurich, Berne, Thun,
Interlachen. Here our Alpine tour might be said to commence, which has
produced much pleasure thus far, and nothing that deserves the name of
difficulty, even for the ladies. From the Valley of Lauterbrunnen we
crossed the Wengern Alp to Grindelwald, and then over the grand Sheideck
to Meyringen. This journey led us over high ground, and for fifteen
leagues along the base of the loftiest Alps, which reared their bare or
snow-clad ridges and pikes, in a clear atmosphere, with fleecy clouds
now and then settling upon and gathering round them. We heard and saw
several avalanches; they are announced by a sound like thunder, but more
metallic and musical. This warning naturally makes one look about, and
we had the gratification of seeing one falling, in the shape and
appearance of a torrent or cascade of foaming water, down the deep-worn
crevices of the steep or perpendicular granite mountains. Nothing can
be more awful than the sound of these cataracts of ice and snow thus
descending, unless it be the silence which succeeds. The elevations from
which we beheld these operations of Nature, and saw such an immense
range of primitive mountains stretching to the east and west, were
covered with rich pasturage and beautiful flowers, among which was
abundance of the monkshood, a flower which I had never seen but in the
trim borders of our gardens, and which here grew not so much in patches
as in little woods or forests, towering above the other plants. At this
season the herdsmen are with their cattle in still higher regions than
those which we have trod, the herbage where we travelled being reserved
till they descend in the autumn. We have visited the Abbey of Engelberg,
not many leagues from the borders of the Lake of Lucerne. The tradition
is, that the site of the abbey was appointed by angels, singing from a
lofty mountain that rises from the plain of the valley, and which, from
having been thus honoured, is called Engelberg, or the Hill of the
Angels. It is a glorious position for such beings, and I should have
thought myself repaid for the trouble of so long a journey by the
impression made upon my mind, when I first came in view of the vale in
which the convent is placed, and of the mountains that enclose it. The
light of the sun had left the valley, and the deep shadows spread over
it heightened the splendour of the evening light, and spread upon the
surrounding mountains, some of which had their summits covered with pure
snow; others were half hidden by vapours rolling round them; and the
Rock of Engelberg could not have been seen under more fortunate
circumstances, for masses of cloud glowing with the reflection of the
rays of the setting sun were hovering round it, like choirs of spirits
preparing to settle upon its venerable head.

To-day we quit this place to ascend the mountain Righi. We shall be
detained in this neighbourhood till our passports are returned from
Berne, signed by the Austrian minister, which we find absolutely
necessary to enable us to proceed into the _Milanese_. At the end of
five weeks at the latest, we hope to reach Geneva, returning by the
Simplon Pass. There I might have the pleasure of hearing from your
Lordship; and may I beg that you would not omit to mention our
Westmoreland politics? The diet of Switzerland is now sitting in this
place. Yesterday I had a long conversation with the Bavarian envoy,
whose views of the state of Europe appear to me very just. This letter
must unavoidably prove dull to your Lordship, but when I have the
pleasure of seeing you, I hope to make some little amends, though I feel
this is a very superficial way of viewing a country, even with reference
merely to the beauties of Nature. We have not met with many English;
there is scarcely a third part as many in the country as there was last
year. A brother of Lord Grey is in the house where we now are, and Lord
Ashburton left yesterday. I must conclude abruptly, with kindest
remembrances to Lady Lonsdale and Lady Mary. Believe me, my Lord, most
faithfully

                   Your Lordship's
                          WM. WORDSWORTH.

                   Paris, Oct. 7 [1820], 45 Rue Charlot,
                    Boulevards du Temple.

MY LORD,

I had the honour of writing to your Lordship from Lucerne, 19th of
August, giving an account of our movements. We have visited, since,
those parts of Switzerland usually deemed most worthy of notice, and the
Italian lakes, having stopped four days at Milan, and as many at Geneva.
With the exception of a couple of days on the Lake of Geneva, the
weather has been most favourable, though frequently during the last
fortnight extremely cold. We have had no detention from illness, nor any
bad accident, for which we feel more grateful, on account of some of our
fellow travellers, who accidentally joined us for a few days. Of these,
one, an American gentleman, was drowned in the Lake of Zurich, by the
upsetting of a boat in a storm, two or three days after he parted with
us; and two others, near the summit of Mount Jura, and in the middle of
a tempestuous night, were precipitated, they scarcely knew how far,
along with one of those frightful and ponderous vehicles, a continental
diligence. We have been in Paris since Sunday last, and think of staying
about a fortnight longer, as scarcely less will suffice for even a hasty
view of the town and neighbourhood. We took Fontainebleau in our way,
and intend giving a day to Versailles. The day we entered Paris we
passed a well-drest young man and woman, dragging a harrow through a
field, like cattle; nevertheless, working in the fields on the sabbath
day does not appear to be general in France. On the same day a
wretched-looking person begged of us, as the carriage was climbing a
hill. Nothing could exceed his transport in receiving a pair of old
pantaloons which were handed out of the carriage. This poor mendicant,
the postilion told us, was an _ancien Curé_. The churches seem generally
falling into decay in the country. We passed one which had been recently
repaired. I have noticed, however, several young persons, men as well as
women, earnestly employed in their devotions, in different churches,
both in Paris and elsewhere. Nothing which I have seen in this city has
interested me at all like the Jardin des Plantes, with the living
animals, and the Museum of Natural History which it includes. Scarcely
could I refrain from tears of admiration at the sight of this apparently
boundless exhibition of the wonders of the creation. The statues and
pictures of the Louvre affect me feebly in comparison. The exterior of
Paris is much changed since I last visited it in 1792. I miss many
ancient buildings, particularly the Temple, where the poor king and his
family were so long confined. That memorable spot, where the Jacobin
Club was held, has also disappeared. Nor are the additional buildings
always improvements; the Pont des Arts, in particular, injures the view
from the Pont Neuf greatly; but in these things public convenience is
the main point.

I say nothing of public affairs, for I have little opportunity of
knowing anything about them. In respect to the business of our Queen, we
deem ourselves truly fortunate in having been out of the country at a
time when an inquiry, at which all Europe seems scandalised, was going
on.

I have purposely deferred congratulating your Lordship on the marriage
of Lady Mary with Lord Frederick Bentinck, which I hear has been
celebrated. My wishes for her happiness are most earnest.

With respectful compliments and congratulations to Lady Lonsdale, in
which Mrs. Wordsworth begs leave to join,

                   I have the honour to be,
                     My Lord,
                       Your Lordship's
                   Obliged and faithful friend and servant,
                            WM. WORDSWORTH.[85]

[85] _Memoirs_, ii. 90-104.


51. _Shakespeare's Cliff at Dover_.

How strange that the description of Dover Cliff, in _King Lear_, should
ever have been supposed to have been meant for a reality! I know nothing
that more forcibly shows the little reflection with which even men of
sense read poetry. The cliff cannot be more than 400 feet high; and yet,
'how truly,' exclaims the historian of Dover, 'has Shakespeare described
the precipice!' How much better would the historian have done, had he
given us its actual elevation![86]

[86] _Memoirs_, ii. 116.


52. _Of Affairs on the Continent_, 1828.

LETTER TO A NEPHEW.

                   Rydal Mount, Nov. 27. 1828.

MY DEAR C----,

It gives me much pleasure to learn that your residence in France has
answered so well. As I had recommended the step, I felt more especially
anxious to be informed of the result. I have only to regret that you did
not tell me whether the interests of a foreign country and a brilliant
metropolis had encroached more upon the time due to academical studies
than was proper.

As to the revolution which Mr. D---- calculates upon, I agree with him
that a great change must take place, but not altogether, or even mainly,
from the causes which he looks to, if I be right in conjecturing that he
expects that the religionists who have at present such influence over
the king's mind will be predominant. The extremes to which they wish to
carry things are not sufficiently in the spirit of the age to suit their
purpose. The French monarchy must undergo a great change, or it will
fall altogether. A constitution of government so disproportioned cannot
endure. A monarchy, without a powerful aristocracy or nobility
graduating into a gentry, and so downwards, cannot long subsist. This is
wanting in France, and must continue to be wanting till the restrictions
imposed on the disposal of property by will, through the Code Napoleon,
are done away with: and it may be observed, by the by, that there is a
bareness, some would call it a simplicity, in that code which unfits it
for a complex state of society like that of France, so that evasions
and stretchings of its provisions are already found necessary, to a
degree which will ere long convince the French people of the necessity
of disencumbering themselves of it. But to return. My apprehension is,
that for the cause assigned, the French monarchy may fall before an
aristocracy can be raised to give it necessary support. The great
monarchies of Russia, Prussia, and Austria, having not yet been subject
to popular revolutions, are still able to maintain themselves, through
the old feudal _forces_ and qualities, with something, not much, of the
feudal _virtues_. This cannot be in France; popular inclinations are
much too strong--thanks, I will say so far, to the Revolution. How is a
government fit for her condition to be supported, but by religion, and a
spirit of honour, or refined conscience? Now religion, in a widely
extended country plentifully peopled, cannot be preserved from abuse of
priestly influence, and from superstition and fanaticism, nor honour be
an operating principle upon a large scale, except through
_property_--that is, such accumulations of it, graduated as I have
mentioned above, through the community. Thus and thus only can be had
exemption from temptation to low habits of mind, leisure for solid
education, and dislike to innovation, from a sense in the several
classes how much they have to lose; for circumstances often make men
wiser, or at least more discreet, when their individual levity or
presumption would dispose them to be much otherwise. To what extent that
constitution of character which is produced by property makes up for the
decay of chivalrous loyalty and strengthens governments, may be seen by
comparing the officers of the English army with those of Prussia, &c.
How far superior are ours as gentlemen! so much so that British officers
can scarcely associate with those of the Continent, not from pride, but
instinctive aversion to their low propensities. But I cannot proceed,
and ought, my dear C----, to crave your indulgence for so long a prose.

When you see Frere, pray give him my kind regards, and say that he shall
hear from me the first frank I can procure. Farewell, with kindest love
from all,

                     Yours, very affectionately,
                                    W.W.[87]

[87] _Memoirs_, ii. 129-131.

53. _Style: Francis Edgeworth's 'Dramatic Fragment:' Criticisms_. I
should say [to your young friend] style is in Poetry of incalculable
importance. He seems, however, aware of it, for his diction is obviously
studied. Now the great difficulty is to determine what constitutes a
good style. In estimating this we are all subject to delusion, not
improbably I am so, when it appears to me that the metaphor in the first
speech of his dramatic scene is too much drawn out. It does not pass off
as rapidly as metaphors ought to do, I think, in dramatic writing. I am
well aware that our early dramatists abound with these continuities of
imagery, but to me they appear laboured and unnatural, at least unsuited
to that species of composition, of which action and motion are the
essentials. 'While with the ashes of a light that was,' and the two
following lines, are in the best style of dramatic writing. To every
opinion thus given always add, I pray you, 'in my judgment,' though I
may not, to save trouble or to avoid a charge of false modesty, express
it. 'This over-pressure of a heavy pleasure,' &c., is admirable; and,
indeed, it would be tedious to praise all that pleases me. Shelley's
'Witch of Atlas' I never saw; therefore the stanza referring to
Narcissus and her was read by me to some disadvantage. One observation I
am about to make will at least prove I am no flatterer, and will
therefore give a qualified value to my praise.

    'There was nought there that morn
    But thrice three antient hills _alone_.'

Here the word 'alone,' being used instead of only, makes an absurdity
like that noticed in the _Spectator_--'Enter a king and three fidlers
_solus_.'[88]

54. _Of the 'Icôn Basiliké,' &c._ LETTER TO SOUTHEY.

MY DEAR S----,

I am ashamed not to have done your message about the _Icôn_ to my
brother.[89]

[88] Extract of Letter to Professor Hamilton, 12th Feb. 1829, here first
printed. G. [F9] This refers to Dr. Wordsworth's volume on the authorship
of _Icôn Basiliké_. London, 1824.

I have no excuse, but that at that time both my body and my memory were
run off their legs. I am very glad you thought the answer[90] appeared
to you triumphant, for it had struck me as in the main point, knowledge
of the subject, and spirit in the writing, and accuracy in the logic, as
one of the best controversial tracts I ever had.

I am glad you have been so busy; I wish I could say so much of myself. I
have written this last month, however, about 600 verses, with tolerable
success.

Many thanks for the review: your article is excellent. I only wish that
you had said more of the deserts of government in respect to Ireland;
since I do sincerely believe that no government in Europe has shown
better dispositions to its subjects than the English have done to the
Irish, and that no country has improved so much during the same period.
You have adverted to this part of the subject, but not spoken so
forcibly as I could have wished. There is another point might be
insisted upon more expressly than you have done--the danger, not to say
the absurdity, of Roman Catholic legislation for the property of a
_Protestant_ church, so inadequately _represented in Parliament_ as ours
is. The Convocation is gone; clergymen are excluded from the House of
Commons; and the Bishops are at the beck of Ministers. I boldly ask what
real property of the country is so inadequately represented: it is a
mere mockery.

                   Most affectionately yours,
                      W.W.[91]

[90] This alludes to Dr. Wordsworth's second publication, entitled 'King
Charles the First the Author of _Icôn Basiliké_.' London, 1828.

[91] _Memoirs_, ii. 132-3.


55. _Of the Roman Catholic Question_.

LETTER TO G. HUNTLY GORDON, ESQ.

                   Rydal Mount, Thursday Night, Feb. 26. 1829.

You ask for my opinion on the Roman Catholic Question.

I dare scarcely trust my pen to the notice of the question which the
Duke of Wellington tells us is about to be _settled_. One thing no
rational person will deny, that the experiment is hazardous. Equally
obvious is it that the timidity, supineness, and other unworthy
qualities of the government for many years past have produced the
danger, the extent of which they now affirm imposes a necessity of
granting all that the Romanists demand. Now, it is rather too much that
the country should be called upon to take the measure of this danger
from the very men who may almost be said to have created it. Danger is a
relative thing, and the first requisite for judging of what we have to
dread from the physical force of the Roman Catholics is to be in
sympathy with the Protestants. Had our Ministers been so, could they
have suffered themselves to be bearded by the Catholic Association for
so many years?

C----, if I may take leave to say it, loses sight of _things_ in
_names_, when he says that they should not be admitted as Roman
Catholics, but simply as British subjects. The question before us is,
Can Protestantism and Popery be coordinate powers in the constitution of
a _free_ country, and at the same time Christian belief be in that
country a vital principle of action?

I fear not. Heaven grant I may be deceived!

W.W.[92]

[92] _Memoirs_, ii. 134.


56. _Of the Roman Catholic Emancipation Bill_.

LETTER TO THE EARL OF LONSDALE.

                   Rydal Mount, Wednesday.

MY LORD,

       *       *       *       *       *

There is one point also delicate to touch upon and hazardous to deal
with, but of prime importance in this crisis. The question, as under the
conduct of the present Ministers, is closely connecting itself with
religion. Now after all, if we are to be preserved from utter confusion,
it is religion and morals, and conscience, which must do the work. The
religious part of the community, especially those attached to the Church
of England, must and _do_ feel that neither the Church as an
establishment, nor its points of Faith as a church, nor Christianity
itself as governed by Scripture, ought to be left long, if it can be
prevented, in the hands which manage our affairs.

But I am running into unpardonable length. I took up the pen principally
to express a hope that your Lordship may have continued to see the
question in the light which affords the only chance of preserving the
nation from several generations perhaps of confusion, and crime, and
wretchedness.

                   Excuse the liberty I have taken,
                     And believe me most faithfully,
                       Your Lordship's
                         Much obliged,
                           W. WORDSWORTH.[93]

[93] _Memoirs_, ii. 135.


57. _Of Ireland and the Poor Laws, &c._

LETTER TO G. HUNTLY GORDON, ESQ.

                   Rydal Mount, Dec. 1. 1829.

MY DEAR SIR,

You must not go to Ireland without applying to me, as the guide-books
for the most part are sorry things, and mislead by their exaggerations.
If I were a younger man, and could prevail upon an able artist to
accompany me, there are few things I should like better than giving a
month or six weeks to explore the county of Kerry only. A judicious
topographical work on that district would be really useful, both for the
lovers of Nature and the observers of manners. As to the Giant's
Causeway and the coast of Antrim, you cannot go wrong; there the
interests obtrude themselves on every one's notice.

The subject of the Poor Laws was never out of my sight whilst I was in
Ireland; it seems to me next to impossible to introduce a general system
of such laws, principally for two reasons: the vast numbers that would
have equal claims for relief, and the non-existence of a class capable
of looking with effect to their administration. Much is done at present
in many places (Derry, for example) by voluntary contributions; but the
narrow-minded escape from the burthen, which falls unreasonably upon the
charitable; so that assessments in the best-disposed places are to be
wished for, could they be effected without producing a greater evil.

The great difficulty that is complained of in the well-managed places is
the floating poor, who cannot be excluded, I am told, by any existing
law from quartering themselves where they like. Open begging is not
practised in many places, but there is no law by which the poor can be
prevented from returning to a place which they may have quitted
voluntarily, or from which they have been expelled (as I was told). Were
it not for this obstacle compulsory local regulations might, I think, be
applied in many districts with good effect.

It would be unfair to myself to quit this momentous subject without
adding that I am a zealous friend to the great principle of the Poor
Laws, as tending, if judiciously applied, much more to elevate than to
depress the character of the labouring classes. I have never seen this
truth developed as it ought to be in parliament.

The day I dined with Lord F.L. Gower at his official residence in the
Phoenix Park, I met there with an intelligent gentleman, Mr. Page, who
was travelling in Ireland expressly to collect information upon this
subject, which, no doubt, he means to publish. If you should hear of
this pamphlet when it comes out procure it, for I am persuaded it will
prove well worth reading. Farewell.

                   Faithfully yours,
                       WILLIAM WORDSWORTH.[94]


58. _Of the Earl of Lonsdale: Virgil: Book-buying: Gifts of Books:
Commentaries_.

TWO LETTERS TO THE VENERABLE ARCHDEACON WRANGHAM.

                   Rydal Mount, Feb. 19. 1819.

DEAR WRANGHAM,

I received your kind letter last night, for which you will accept my
thanks. I write upon the spur of that mark of your regard, or my
aversion to letter-writing might get the better of me.

I find it difficult to speak publicly of good men while alive,
especially if they are persons who have power. The world ascribes the
eulogy to interested motives, or to an adulatory spirit, which I detest.
But of LORD LONSDALE, I will say to you, that I do not think there
exists in England a man of any rank more anxiously desirous to discharge
his duty in that state of life to which it has pleased God to call him.
His thought and exertions are constantly directed to that object; and
the more he is known the more is he beloved, and respected, and admired.

[94] _Memoirs_, ii. 155-6.

I ought to have thanked you before for your version of VIRGIL'S
ECLOGUES, which reached me at last. I have lately compared it line for
line with the original, and think it very well done. I was particularly
pleased with the skill you have shown in managing the contest between
the shepherds in the third Pastoral, where you have included in a
succession of couplets the sense of Virgil's paired hexameters. I think
I mentioned to you that these poems of Virgil have always delighted me
much; there is frequently either an elegance or a happiness which no
translation can hope to equal. In point of fidelity your translation is
very good indeed.

You astonish me with the account of your books; and I should have been
still more astonished if you had told me you had read a third (shall I
say a tenth part?) of them. My reading powers were never very good, and
now they are much diminished, especially by candle-light; and as to
_buying_ books, I can affirm that in _new_ books I have not spent five
shillings for the last five years, _i.e._, in Reviews, Magazines,
Pamphlets, &c. &c.; so that there would be an end of Mr. Longman, and
Mr. Cadell, &c. &c., if nobody had more power or inclination to buy than
myself. And as to old books, my dealings in that way, for want of means,
have been very trifling. Nevertheless, small and paltry as my collection
is, I have not read a fifth part of it. I should, however, like to see
your army.

    'Such forces met not, nor so wide a camp,
    When Agrican, with fill his _northern_ powers,
    Besieged Albracca, as _romances_ tell.'

Not that I accuse you of romancing; I verily believe that you have all
the books you speak of. Dear Wrangham, are you and I ever like to meet
in this world again? _Yours_ is a _corner_ of the earth; _mine_ is _not_
so. I never heard of anybody going to Bridlington; but all the world
comes to the Lakes. Farewell. Excuse this wretched scrawl; it is like
all that proceeds from, my miserable pen.

       *       *       *       *       *

                   Ever faithfully yours,
                       WM. WORDSWORTH.

DEAR WRANGHAM,

You are very good in sending one letter after another to inquire after a
person so undeserving of attentions of this kind as myself. Dr. Johnson,
I think, observes, or rather is made to observe by some of his
biographers, that no man delights to _give_ what he is accustomed to
_sell_. 'For example: you, Mr. Thrale, would rather part with anything
in this way than your porter.' Now, though I have never been much of a
salesman in matters of literature (the whole of my returns--I do not say
_net profits_, but _returns_--from the writing trade, not amounting to
seven score pounds), yet, somehow or other, I manufacture a letter, and
part with it as reluctantly as if it were really a thing of price. But,
to drop the comparison, I have so much to do with writing, in the way of
labour and profession, that it is difficult to me to conceive how
anybody can take up a pen but from constraint. My writing-desk is to me
a place of punishment; and, as my penmanship sufficiently testifies. I
always bend over it with some degree of impatience. All this is said
that you may know the real cause of my silence, and not ascribe it in
any degree to slight or forgetfulness on my part, or an insensibility to
your worth and the value of your friendship.... As to my occupations,
they look little at the present age; but I live in hope of leaving
something behind me that by some minds will be valued.

I see no new books except by the merest accident. Of course your poem,
which I should have been pleased to read, has not found its way to me.
You inquire about old books: you might almost as well have asked for my
teeth as for any of mine. The only _modern_ books that I read are those
of Travels, or such as relate to matters of fact; and the only modern
books that I care for; but as to old ones, I am like yourself--scarcely
anything comes amiss to me. The little time I have to spare--the very
little, I may say--all goes that way. If, however, in the _line of your
profession_ you want any bulky old Commentaries on the Scriptures (such
as not twelve strong men of these degenerate days will venture--I do not
say to _read_, but to _lift_), I can, perhaps, as a special favour,
accommodate you.

I and mine will be happy to see you and yours here or anywhere; but I am
sorry the time you talk of is so distant: a year and a half is a long
time looking forward, though looking back ten times as much is as brief
as a dream. My writing is wholly illegible--at least I fear so; I had
better, therefore, release you.

                   Believe me, my dear Wrangham,
                     Your affectionate friend,
                        W. WORDSWORTH.[95]


59. _Poems of Edward Moxon_.

LETTER TO MOXON.

                   (Postmark) Dec. 8. 1826.

DEAR SIR,

It is some time since I received your little volume, for which I now
return you my thanks, and also for the obliging letter that accompanied
it.

Your poem I have read with no inconsiderable pleasure; it is full of
natural sentiments and pleasing pictures: among the minor pieces, the
last pleased me much the best, and especially the latter part of it.
This little volume, with what I saw of yourself during a short
interview, interest me in your welfare; and the more so, as I always
feel some apprehension for the destiny of those who in youth addict
themselves to the composition of verse. It is a very seducing
employment, and, though begun in disinterested love of the Muses, is too
apt to connect itself with self-love, and the disquieting passions which
follow in the train of that our natural infirmity. Fix your eye upon
acquiring independence by honourable business, and let the Muses come
after rather than go before. Such lines as the latter of this couplet,

    'Where lovely woman, chaste as heaven above.
    Shines in the golden virtues of her love,'

and many other passages in your poem, give proof of no common-place
sensibility. I am therefore the more earnest that you should guard
yourself against this temptation.

Excuse this freedom; and believe me, my dear Sir, very faithfully,

                   Your obliged servant,
                      WM. WORDSWORTH.[96]

[95] _Memoirs_, ii. 205-9.

[96] _Ibid._ ii. 211-12.


60. _Of Hamilton's 'It haunts me yet' and Miss Hamilton's 'Boys'
School.'_

LETTER TO W.R. HAMILTON, ESQ., OBSERVATORY, NEAR DUBLIN.

                   Rydal Mount, near Kendal, Sept. 24. 1827.

MY DEAR SIR,

You will have no pain to suffer from my sincerity. With a safe
conscience I can assure you that in my judgment your verses are animated
with true poetic spirit, as they are evidently the product of strong
feeling. The sixth and seventh stanzas affected me much, even to the
dimming of my eye and faltering of my voice while I was reading them
aloud. Having said this, I have said enough; now for the _per contra_.

You will not, I am sure, be hurt, when I tell you that the workmanship
(what else could be expected from so young a writer?) is not what it
ought to be; even in those two affecting stanzas it is not perfect:

    'Some touch of human sympathy find way,
    And whisper that though Truth's and Science' ray
    With such serene effulgence o'er thee shone.'

Sympathy might whisper, but a '_touch_ of sympathy' could not. 'Truth's
and Science' ray,' for the ray of truth and science, is not only
extremely harsh, but a 'ray _shone_' is, if not absolutely a pleonasm, a
great awkwardness: 'a ray fell' or 'shot' may be said, and a sun or a
moon or a candle shone, but not a ray. I much regret that I did not
receive these verses while you were here, that I might have given you,
_vivâ voce_, a comment upon them, which would be tedious by letter, and
after all very imperfect. If I have the pleasure of seeing you again, I
will beg permission to dissect these verses, or any other you may be
inclined to show me; but I am certain that without conference with me,
or any benefit drawn from my practice in metrical composition, your own
high powers of mind will lead you to the main conclusions.

You will be brought to acknowledge that the logical faculty has
infinitely more to do with poetry than the young and the inexperienced,
whether writer or critic, ever dreams of. Indeed, as the materials upon
which that faculty is exorcised in poetry are so subtle, so plastic, so
complex, the application of it requires an adroitness which can proceed
from nothing but practice, a discernment which emotion is so far from
bestowing that at first it is ever in the way of it. Here I must stop:
only let me advert to two lines:

    'But shall despondence therefore _blench_ my _brow_,
    Or pining sorrow sickly ardor o'er.'

These are two of the worst lines in mere expression. 'Blench' is perhaps
miswritten for 'blanch;' if not, I don't understand the word. _Blench_
signifies to flinch. If 'blanch' be the word, the next ought to be
'_hair_.' You cannot here use _brow_ for the _hair_ upon it, because a
white brow or forehead is a beautiful characteristic of youth. 'Sickly
ardor o'er' was at first reading to me unintelligible. I took 'sickly'
to be an adjective joined with 'ardor,' whereas you mean it as a portion
of a verb, from Shakspeare, 'Sicklied o'er with the pale cast of
thought.' But the separation of the parts or decomposition of the word,
as here done, is not to be endured.

Let me now come to your sister's verses, for which I thank you. They are
surprisingly vigorous for a female pen, but occasionally too rugged, and
especially for such a subject; they have also the same faults in
expression as your own, but not, I think, in quite an equal degree. Much
is to be hoped from feelings so strong, and from a mind thus disposed. I
should have entered into particulars with these also, had I seen you
after they came into my hands. Your sister is, no doubt, aware that in
her poem she has trodden the same ground as Gray, in his 'Ode upon a
distant Prospect of Eton College.' What he has been contented to treat
in the abstract, she has represented in particular, and with admirable
spirit. But again, my dear Sir, let me exhort you (and do you exhort
your sister) to deal little with modern writers, but fix your attention
almost exclusively upon those who have stood the test of time. _You_
have not leisure to allow of your being tempted to turn aside from the
right course by deceitful lights. My household desire to be remembered
to you in no formal way. Seldom have I parted, never I was going to say,
with one whom after so short an acquaintance, I lost sight of with more
regret. I trust we shall meet again, if not [sentence cut off with the
autograph]. Postscript. Pray do not forget to remember me to Mr. Otway.
I was much pleased with him and with your fellow-traveller Mr. Nimmo,
as I should have been, no doubt, with the young Irishman, had not our
conversation taken so serious a turn. The passage in Tacitus which
Milton's line so strongly resembles is not in the 'Agricola,' nor can I
find it, but it exists somewhere.

W. WORDSWORTH.[97]


61. _Of Collins, Dyer, Thomson, &c._

LETTER TO REV. ALEXANDER DYCE.

                   Rydal Mount, Kendal, Jan. 12. 1829.

DEAR SIR,

I regret to hear of the indisposition from which you have been
suffering.

That you are convinced[98] gives me great pleasure, as I hope that every
other editor of Collins will follow your example. You are at perfect
liberty to declare that you have rejected Bell's copy in consequence of
my opinion of it; and I feel much satisfaction in being the instrument
of rescuing the memory of Collins from this disgrace. I have always felt
some concern that Mr. Home, who lived several years after Bell's
publication, did not testify more regard for his deceased friend's
memory by protesting against this imposition. Mr. Mackenzie is still
living; and I shall shortly have his opinion upon the question; and if
it be at all interesting, I shall take the liberty of sending it to you.


[97] _Memoirs_, ii. 212-14, with important additions from the original.
G.

[98] _i.e._ convinced by what Wordsworth had remarked to me, that those
portions of Collins's 'Ode on the Superstitions of the Highlanders,'
which first appeared in Bell's edition of that Ode, were forgeries.
_A.D._

Dyer is another of our minor poets--minor as to quantity--of whom one
would wish to know more. Particulars about him might still be collected,
I should think, in South Wales, his native country, and where in early
life he practised as a painter. I have often heard Sir George Beaumont
express a curiosity about his pictures, and a wish to see any specimen
of his pencil that might survive. If you are a rambler, perhaps you may,
at some time or other, be led into Carmarthenshire, and might bear in
mind what I have just said of this excellent author.

I had once a hope to have learned some unknown particulars of Thomson,
about Jedburgh, but I was disappointed. Had I succeeded, I meant to
publish a short life of him, prefixed to a volume containing 'The
Seasons,' 'The Castle of Indolence,' his minor pieces in rhyme, and a
few extracts from his plays, and his 'Liberty;' and I feel still
inclined to do something of the kind. These three writers, Thomson,
Collins, and Dyer, had more poetic imagination than any of their
contemporaries, unless we reckon Chatterton as of that age. I do not
name Pope, for he stands alone, as a man most highly gifted; but
unluckily he took the plain when the heights were within his reach.

Excuse this long letter, and believe me,

                   Sincerely yours,
                     WM. WORDSWORTH.[99]

[99] _Memoirs_, ii. 214-16.


62. _Verses and Counsels_.

LETTER TO PROFESSOR HAMILTON, OBSERVATORY, DUBLIN.

                   Rydal Mount, July 24. 1820.

MY DEAR SIR,

I have been very long in your debt. An inflammation in my eyes cut me
off from writing and reading, so that I deem it still prudent to employ
an Amanuensis; but I had a more decisive reason for putting off payment,
nothing less than the hope that I might discharge my debt in person: it
seems better, however, to consult you beforehand. I wish to make a Tour
in Ireland, and _perhaps_ along with my daughter, but I am ignorant of
so many points, as where to begin, whether it be safe at this _rioting_
period, what is best worth seeing, what mode of travelling will furnish
the greatest advantages at the least expense. Dublin of course--the
Wicklow mountains--Killarney Lakes--and I think the ruins not far from
Limerick would be among my objects, and return by the North; but I can
form no conjecture as to the time requisite for this, and whether it
would be best to take the steamboat from Liverpool to Cork, beginning
there, or to go from Whitehaven to Dublin. To start from Whitehaven by
steam to Dublin would suit me as being nearer this place and a shorter
voyage; besides my son is settled near Whitehaven, and I could
conveniently embark from his abode.

I have read with great pleasure the 'Sketches in Ireland' which Mr.
Otway was kind enough to present to me; but many interesting things he
speaks of in the West will be quite out of my reach. In short I am as
unprepared with Tourists' information as any man can be, and sensible as
I am of the very great value of your time, I cannot refrain from begging
you to take pity upon my ignorance and to give me some information,
keeping in mind the possibility of my having a female companion.

It is time to thank you for the verses you so obligingly sent me.

Your sister's have abundance of spirit and feeling; all that they want
is what appears in itself of little moment, and yet is of incalculably
great,--that is, workmanship,--the art by which the thoughts are made to
melt into each other, and to fall into light and shadow, regulated by
distinct preconception of the best general effect they are capable of
producing. This may seem very vague to you, but by conversation I think
I could make it appear otherwise. It is enough for the present to say
that I was much gratified, and beg you would thank your sister for
favouring me with the sight of compositions so distinctly marked with
that quality which is the subject of them ['Genius']. Your own verses
are to me very interesting, and affect me much as evidences of high and
pure-mindedness, from which humble-mindedness is inseparable. I like to
see and think of you among the stars, and between death and immortality,
where three of these poems place you. The 'Dream of Chivalry' is also
interesting in another way; but it would be insincere not to say that
something of a style more terse, and a harmony more accurately balanced,
must be acquired before the bodily form of your verses will be quite
worthy of their living soul. You are probably aware of this, tho'
perhaps not in an equal degree with myself; nor is it desirable you
should, for it might tempt you to labour, which would divert you from
subjects of infinitely greater importance.

Many thanks for your interesting account of Mr. Edgeworth. I heartily
concur with you in the wish that neither Plato nor any other profane
author may lead him from the truths of the Gospel, without which our
existence is an insupportable mystery to the thinking mind.

Looking for a reply at your early convenience,

    I remain, my dear Sir, faithfully, your obliged
    WM. WORDSWORTH.[100]

[100] _Memoirs_, ii. 216-17.


63. _'Annuals' and publishing Roguery_.

LETTER TO C. HUNTLY GORDON, ESQ. Rydal Mount, July 29. 1829.

MY DEAR SIR,

I hope you have enjoyed yourself in the country, as we have been doing
among our shady woods, and green hills, and invigorated streams. The
summer is passing on, and I have not left home, and perhaps shall not;
for it is far more from duty than inclination that I quit my dear and
beautiful home; and duty pulls two ways. On the one side my mind stands
in need of being fed by new objects for meditation and reflection, the
more so because diseased eyes have cut me off so much from reading; and,
on the other hand, I am obliged to look at the expense of distant
travelling, as I am not able to take so much out of my body by walking
as heretofore.

I have not got my MS. back from the ----,[101] whose managers have,
between them, used me shamefully; but my complaint is principally of the
editor, for with the proprietor I have had little direct connection. If
you think it worth while, you shall, at some future day, see such parts
of the correspondence as I have preserved. Mr. Southey is pretty much in
the same predicament with them, though he has kept silence for the
present.... I am properly served for having had any connection with such
things. My only excuse is, that they offered me a very liberal sum, and
that I have laboured hard through a long life, without more pecuniary
emolument than a lawyer gets for two special retainers, or a public
performer sometimes for two or three songs. Farewell; pray let me hear
from 3-011 at your early convenience,

                   And believe me faithfully your
                     Much obliged
                       WM. WORDSWORTH.[102]

[101] An Annual, to which Wordsworth had been induced to become a
contributor.

[102] _Memoirs_, ii. 217-18.


64. _Works of George Peele_.

LETTER TO REV. ALEXANDER DYCE.

                   Rydal Mount, Kendal, Oct. 16. 1829.

MY DEAR SIR,

On my return from Ireland, where I have been travelling a few weeks, I
found your present of George Peele's works, and the obliging letter
accompanying it; for both of which I offer my cordial thanks.

English literature is greatly indebted to your labours; and I have much
pleasure in this occasion of testifying my respect for the sound
judgment and conscientious diligence with which you discharge your duty
as an editor. Peele's works were well deserving of the care you have
bestowed upon them; and, as I did not previously possess a copy of any
part of them, the beautiful book which you have sent me was very
acceptable.

By accident, I learned lately that you had made a Book of Extracts,
which I had long wished for opportunity and industry to execute myself.
I am happy it has fallen into so much better hands. I allude to your
_Selections from the Poetry of English Ladies_. I had only a glance at
your work; but I will take this opportunity of saying, that should a
second edition be called for, I should be pleased with the honour of
being consulted by you about it. There is one poetess to whose writings
I am especially partial, the Countess of Winchelsea. I have perused her
poems frequently, and should be happy to name such passages as I think
most characteristic of her genius, and most fit to be selected.

I know not what to say about my intended edition of a portion of
Thomson. There appears to be some indelicacy in one poet treating
another in that way. The example is not good, though I think there are
few to whom the process might be more advantageously applied than to
Thomson. Yet, so sensible am I of the objection, that I should not have
entertained the thought, but for the expectation held out to me by an
acquaintance, that valuable materials for a new Life of Thomson might be
procured. In this I was disappointed.


                   With much respect, I remain, dear Sir,
                     Sincerely yours,
                       WM. WORDSWORTH.[103]

[103] _Memoirs_, ii. 219-220.


65. _Of Lady Winchelsea, Tickell, &c.: Sonnets, &c._

LETTER TO REV. ALEXANDER DYCE.

                   Rydal Mount, Kendal, May 10. 1830.

MY DEAR SIR,

My last was, for want of room, concluded so abruptly, that I avail
myself of an opportunity of sending you a few additional words free of
postage, upon the same subject.

I observed that Lady Winchelsea was unfortunate in her
models--_Pindarics_ and _Fables_; nor does it appear from her
_Aristomenes_ that she would have been more successful than her
contemporaries, if she had cultivated tragedy. She had sensibility
sufficient for the tender parts of dramatic writing, but in the stormy
and tumultuous she would probably have failed altogether. She seems to
have made it a moral and religious duty to control her feelings lest
they should mislead her. Of love, as a passion, she is afraid, no doubt
from a conscious inability to soften it down into friendship. I have
often applied two lines of her drama (p. 318) to her affections:

                         'Love's soft bands,
    His gentle cords of hyacinths and roses,
    Wove in the dewy Spring when storms are silent.'

By the by, in the next page are two impassioned lines spoken to a person
fainting:

    'Then let me hug and press thee into life,
    And lend thee motion from my beating heart.'

From the style and versification of this, so much her longest work, I
conjecture that Lady Winchelsea had but a slender acquaintance with the
drama of the earlier part of the preceding century. Yet her style in
rhyme is often admirable, chaste, tender, and vigorous, and entirely
free from sparkle, antithesis, and that overculture, which reminds one,
by its broad glare, its stiffness, and heaviness, of the double daisies
of the garden, compared with their modest and sensitive kindred of the
fields. Perhaps I am mistaken, but I think there is a good deal of
resemblance in her style and versification to that of Tickell, to whom
Dr. Johnson justly assigns a high place among the minor poets, and of
whom Goldsmith rightly observes, that there is a strain of
ballad-thinking through all his poetry, and it is very attractive. Pope,
in that production of his boyhood, the 'Ode to Solitude,' and in his
'Essay on Criticism,' has furnished proofs that at one period of his
life he felt the charm of a sober and subdued style, which he afterwards
abandoned for one that is, to my taste at least, too pointed and
ambitious, and for a versification too timidly balanced.

If a second edition of your 'Specimens' should be called for, you might
add from Helen Maria Williams the 'Sonnet to the Moon,' and that to
'Twilight;' and a few more from Charlotte Smith, particularly,

    'I love thee, mournful, sober-suited Night.'

At the close of a sonnet of Miss Seward are two fine verses:

    'Come, that I may not hear the winds of night.
    Nor count the heavy eave-drops as they fall.'

You have well characterised the poetic powers of this lady; but, after
all, her verses please me, with all their faults, better than those of
Mrs. Barbauld, who, with much higher powers of mind, was spoiled as a
poetess by being a dissenter, and concerned with a dissenting academy.
One of the most pleasing passages in her poetry is the close of the
lines upon 'Life,' written, I believe, when she was not less than eighty
years of age:

    'Life, we have been long together,' &c.[104]

You have given a specimen of that ever-to-be-pitied victim of Swift,
'Vanessa.' I have somewhere a short piece of hers upon her passion for
Swift, which well deserves to be added. But I am becoming tedious, which
you will ascribe to a well-meant endeavour to make you some return for
your obliging attentions.

                   I remain, dear Sir, faithfully yours,
                      WM. WORDSWORTH.[105]

[104] It was on hearing these lines repeated by his friend, Mr. H.C.
Robinson, that Wordsworth exclaimed, 'Well! I am not given to envy other
people their good things; but I _do_ wish I had written _that_.' He much
admired Mrs. Barbauld's Essays, and sent a copy of them, with a
laudatory letter upon them, to the Archbishop of Canterbury.

[105] _Memoirs_, ii. 220-22.


66. _Hamilton's 'Spirit of Beauty:' Verbal Criticism: Female Authorship:
Words_.

Where there is so much sincerity of feeling in a matter so dignified as
the renunciation of poetry for science, one feels that an apology is
necessary for verbal criticism. I will therefore content myself with
observing that 'joying' for joy or joyance is not to my taste. Indeed I
object to such liberties upon principle. We should soon have no language
at all if the unscrupulous coinage of the present day were allowed to
pass, and become a precedent for the future. One of the first duties of
a Writer is to ask himself whether his thought, feeling, or image cannot
be expressed by existing words or phrases, before he goes about creating
new terms, even when they are justified by the analogies of the
language. 'The cataract's steep flow' is both harsh and inaccurate:
'thou hast seen me bend over the cataract' would express one idea in
simplicity and all that was required. Had it been necessary to be more
particular, 'steep flow' are not the words that ought to have been used.
I remember Campbell says in a composition that is overrun with faulty
language, 'And dark as winter was the _flow_ of Iser rolling rapidly;'
that is, 'flowing rapidly.' The expression ought to have been 'stream'
or 'current...' These may appear to you frigid criticisms, but depend
upon it no writings will live in which these rules are disregarded....

Female authorship is to be shunned as bringing in its train more and
heavier evils than have presented themselves to your sister's ingenuous
mind. No true friend I am sure will endeavour to shake her resolution to
remain in her own quiet and healthful obscurity. This is not said with a
view to discourage her from writing, nor have the remarks made above any
aim of the kind; they are rather intended to assist her in writing with
more permanent satisfaction to herself. She will probably write less in
proportion as she subjects her feelings to logical forms, but the range
of her sensibilities so far from being narrowed will extend as she
improves in the habit of looking at things thro' a steady light of
words; and, to speak a little metaphysically, words are not a mere
vehicle, but they are powers either to kill or animate.[106]

[106] Extract of letter to Professor Hamilton, Dublin, Dec. 23d, 1829.

67. _His 'Play:' Hone: Eyesight failing, &c._

                   TO CHARLES LAMB, ESQ.
                                      Jan. 10. 1830.
MY DEAR LAMB,

A whole twelvemonth have I been a letter in your debt, for which fault I
have been sufficiently punished by self-reproach.

I liked your Play marvellously, having no objection to it but one, which
strikes me as applicable to a large majority of plays, those of
Shakspeare himself not entirely excepted--I mean a little degradation of
character for a more dramatic turn of plot. Your present of Hone's book
was very acceptable; and so much so, that your part of the book is the
cause why I did not write long ago. I wished to enter a little minutely
into notice of the dramatic extracts, and, on account of the smallness
of the print, deferred doing so till longer days would allow me to read
without candle-light, which I have long since given up. But, alas! when
the days lengthened, my eyesight departed, and for many months I could
not read three minutes at a time. You will be sorry to hear that this
infirmity still hangs about me, and almost cuts me off from reading
altogether. But how are you, and how is your dear sister? I long much,
as we all do, to know.

For ourselves, this last year, owing to my sister's dangerous illness,
the effects of which are not yet got over, has been an anxious one and
melancholy. But no more of this. My sister has probably told everything
about the family; so that I may conclude with less scruple, by assuring
you of my sincere and faithful affection for you and your dear sister.

                                      WM. WORDSWORTH.[107]

68. _Summer: Mr. Quillinan: Draining, &c._

LETTER TO G. HUNTLY GORDON, ESQ.

                   Rydal Mount, April 6. 1830.

MY DEAR MR. GORDON,

You are kind in noticing with thanks my rambling notes.[108]

We have had here a few days of delicious summer weather.

[107] _Memoirs_, ii. 223.

[108] On a proposed tour.

It appeared with the suddenness of a pantomimic trick, stayed longer
than we had a right to expect, and was as rapidly succeeded by high
wind, bitter cold, and winter snow, over hill and dale.

I am not surprised that you are so well pleased with Mr. Quillinan. The
more you see of him the better you will like him. You ask what are my
employments. According to Dr. Johnson they are such as entitle me to
high commendation, for I am not only making two blades of grass grow
where only one grew before, but a dozen. In plain language, I am
draining a bit of spungy ground.[109] In the field where this goes on I
am making a green terrace that commands a beautiful view of our two
lakes, Rydal and Windermere, and more than two miles of intervening vale
with the stream visible by glimpses flowing through it. I shall have
great pleasure in showing you this among the other returns which I hope
one day to make for your kindness.

                   Adieu, yours,
                           W.W.[110]


69. _Works of Webster, &c.: Elder Poets: Dr. Darwin: 'Excursion:'
Collins, &c._

LETTER TO REV. ALEXANDER DYCE.

[No date, but Postmark, 1830.]

I am truly obliged, my dear Sir, by your valuable present of Webster's
Dramatic Works and the 'Specimens.'[111] Your publisher was right in
insisting upon the whole of Webster, otherwise the book might have been
superseded, either by an entire edition separately given to the world,
or in some _corpus_ of the dramatic writers. The poetic genius of
England, with the exception of Chaucer, Spenser, Milton, Dryden, Pope,
and a very few more, is to be sought in her drama. How it grieves one
that there is so little probability of those valuable authors being read
except by the curious! I questioned my friend Charles Lamb whether it
would answer for some person of real taste to undertake abridging the
plays that are not likely to be read as wholes, and telling such parts
of the story in brief abstract as were ill managed in the drama. He
thought it would not. I, however, am inclined to think it would.

[109] In the field to the S.W. below the garden at Rydal.

[110] _Memoirs_, ii. 224.

[111] _Specimens of British Poetesses. A.D._

The account of your indisposition gives me much concern. It pleases me,
however, to see that, though you may suffer, your industry does not
relax; and I hope that your pursuits are rather friendly than injurious
to your health.

You are quite correct in your notice of my obligation to Dr.
Darwin.[112] In the first edition of the poem it was acknowledged in a
note, which slipped out of its place in the last, along with some
others. In putting together that edition, I was obliged to cut up
several copies; and, as several of the poems also changed their places,
some confusion and omission, and, in one instance, a repetition, was the
consequence. Nothing, however, so bad as in the edition of 1820, where a
long poem, 'The Lament of Mary Queen of Scots,' was by mistake
altogether omitted. Another unpleasantness arose from the same cause;
for, in some instances, notwithstanding repeated charges to the printer,
you have only two Spenserian stanzas in a page (I speak now of the last
edition) instead of three; and there is the same irregularity in
printing other forms of stanza.

You must indeed have been fond of that ponderous quarto, 'The
Excursion,' to lug it about as you did.[113] In the edition of 1827 it
was diligently revised, and the sense in several instances got into less
room; yet still it is a long poem for these feeble and fastidious times.
You would honour me much by accepting a copy of my poetical works; but I
think it better to defer offering it to you till a new edition is called
for, which will be ere long, as I understand the present is getting low.

[112] In Mr. W.'s lines 'To Enterprise.' _A.D._

[113] I had mentioned to Mr. W. that, when I had a curacy in Cornwall, I
used frequently to carry 'The Excursion' down to the sea-shore, and read
it there. _A.D._

A word or two about Collins. You know what importance I attach to
following strictly the last copy of the text of an author; and I do not
blame you for printing in the 'Ode to Evening' 'brawling' spring; but
surely the epithet is most unsuitable to the time, the very worst, I
think, that could have been chosen.

I now come to Lady Winchelsea. First, however, let me say a few words
upon one or two other authoresses of your 'Specimens.' British poetesses
make but a poor figure in the 'Poems by Eminent Ladies.'[114]

[114] Two volumes, 1755. _A.D._

But observing how injudicious that selection is in the case of Lady
Winchelsea, and of Mrs. Aphra Behn (from whose attempts they are
miserably copious), I have thought something better might have been
chosen by more competent persons who had access to the volumes of the
several writers. In selecting from Mrs. Pilkington, I regret that you
omitted (look at p. 255) 'Sorrow,' or at least that you did not abridge
it. The first and third paragraph are very affecting. See also
'Expostulation,' p. 258: it reminds me strongly of one of the
Penitential Hymns of Burns. The few lines upon St. John the Baptist, by
Mrs. Killigrew (vol. ii. p. 6), are pleasing. A beautiful Elegy of Miss
Warton (sister to the poets of that name) upon the death of her father,
has escaped your notice; nor can I refer you to it. Has the Duchess of
Newcastle written much verse? her Life of her Lord, and the extracts in
your book, and in the 'Eminent Ladies,' are all that I have seen of
hers. The 'Mirth and Melancholy' has so many fine strokes of
imagination, that I cannot but think there must be merit in many parts
of her writings. How beautiful those lines, from 'I dwell in groves,' to
the conclusion, 'Yet better loved, the more that I am known,' excepting
the four verses after 'Walk up the hills.' And surely the latter verse
of the couplet,

    'The tolling bell which for the dead rings out;
    A mill where rushing waters run about;'

is very noticeable: no person could have hit upon that union of images
without being possessed of true poetic feeling. Could you tell me
anything of Lady Mary Wortley Montagu more than is to be learned from
Pope's letters and her own? She seems to have been destined for
something much higher and better than she became. A parallel between her
genius and character and that of Lady Winchelsea her contemporary
(though somewhat prior to her) would be well worth drawing.

And now at last for the poems of Lady Winchelsea. I will transcribe a
note from a blank leaf of my own edition, written by me before I saw the
scanty notice of her in Walpole. (By the by, that book has always
disappointed me when I have consulted it upon any particular occasion.)
The note runs thus: 'The "Fragment," p. 280, seems to prove that she was
attached to James II., as does p. 42, and that she suffered by the
Revolution. The most celebrated of these poems, but far from the best,
is "The Spleen." "The Petition for an absolute Retreat," and the
"Nocturnal Reverie," are of much superior merit. See also for favourable
specimens, p. 156; "On the Death of Mr. Thynne," p. 263; and p. 280,
"Fragment." The Fable of "Love, Death, and Reputation," p. 29, is
ingeniously told.' Thus far my own note. I will now be more particular.
P. 3, 'Our Vanity,' &c., and p. 163 are noticeable as giving some
account from herself of her authorship. See also p. 148, where she
alludes to 'The Spleen.' She was unlucky in her models, Pindaric Odes
and French Fables. But see p. 70, 'The Blindness of Elymas,' for proof
that she could write with powers of a high order when her own individual
character and personal feelings were not concerned. For less striking
proofs of this power, see p. 4, 'All is Vanity,' omitting verses 5 and
6, and reading 'clouds that are lost and gone,' &c. There is merit in
the two next stanzas; and the last stanza towards the close contains a
fine reproof for the ostentation of Louis XIV., and one magnificent
verse,

    'Spent the astonished hours, forgetful to adore.'

But my paper is nearly out. As far as 'For my garments,' p. 36, the poem
is charming; it then falls off; revives at p. 39, 'Give me there;' p.
41, &c., reminds me of Dyer's 'Grongar Hill;' it revives p. 47, towards
the bottom, and concludes with sentiments worthy of the writer, though
not quite so happily expressed as other parts of the poem. See pages 82,
92, 'Whilst in the Muses' paths I stray;' p. 113. 'The Cautious Lovers,'
p. 118, has little poetic merit, but is worth reading as characteristic
of the author. P. 143, 'Deep lines of honour,' &c., to 'maturer age.' P.
151, if shortened, would be striking; p. 154, characteristic; p. 159,
from 'Meanwhile, ye living parents,' to the close, omitting 'Nor could
we hope,' and the five following verses; p. 217, last paragraph; p. 259,
_that_ you have;[115] pp. 262, 263; p. 280, Was Lady W. a R. Catholic?
p. 290, 'And to the clouds proclaim thy fall;' p. 291, omit 'When
scatter'd glow-worms,' and the next couplet. I have no more room. Pray,
excuse this vile scrawl.

Ever faithfully yours, W.W.

P.S. I have inconsiderately sent your letter to my daughter (now
absent), without copying the address. I knew the letter would interest
her. I shall direct to your publisher.[116]

Rydal Mount.

[115] Mr. W. means, that I _have_ inserted that poem in my 'Specimens.'
_A.D._

[116] _Memoirs_, ii. 225-30.


70. _French Revolution_, 1830.

LETTERS TO G. HUNTLY GORDON, ESQ.

MY DEAR MR. GORDON,

       *       *       *       *       *

I cannot but deeply regret that the late King of France and his
ministers should have been so infatuated. Their stupidity, not to say
their crimes, has given an impulse to the revolutionary and democratic
spirit throughout Europe which is premature, and from which much
immediate evil may be apprehended, whatever things may settle into at
last. Whereas had the Government conformed to the increasing knowledge
of the people, and not surrendered itself to the counsels of the priests
and the bigoted Royalists, things might have been kept in an even
course, to the mutual improvement and benefit of both governed and
governors.

In France incompatible things are aimed at--a monarchy and democracy to
be united without an intervening aristocracy to constitute a graduated
scale of power and influence. I cannot conceive how an hereditary
monarchy can exist without an hereditary peerage in a country so large
as France, nor how either can maintain their ground if the law of the
Napoleon Code, compelling equal division of property by will, be not
repealed. And I understand that a vast majority of the French are
decidedly adverse to the repeal of that law, which, I cannot but think,
will ere long be found injurious both to France and, in its collateral
effects, to the rest of Europe.

                   Ever, dear Mr. Gordon,
                        Cordially and faithfully yours,
                            WM. WORDSWORTH.

MY DEAR MR. GORDON,

Thanks for your hint about Rhenish: strength from wine is good, from
water still better.

       *       *       *       *       *

One is glad to see tyranny baffled and foolishness put to shame; but the
French King and his ministers will be unfairly judged by all those who
take not into consideration the difficulties of their position. It is
not to be doubted that there has long existed a determination, and that
plans have been laid, to destroy the Government which the French
received, as they felt, at the hands of the Allies, and their pride
could not bear. Moreover, the Constitution, had it been their own
choice, would by this time have lost favour in the eyes of the French,
as not sufficiently democratic for the high notion _that_ people
entertain of their fitness to govern themselves; but, for my own part,
I'd rather fill the office of a parish beadle than sit on the throne
where the Duke of Orleans has suffered himself to be placed.

The heat is gone, and but that we have too much rain again the country
would be enchanting.

                   With a thousand thanks,
                     I remain ever yours,
                      WM. WORDSWORTH.[117]


71. _Nonsense: Rotten Boroughs: Sonnets: Pegasus: Kenelm Digby:
Tennysons_.

LETTERS TO PROFESSOR HAMILTON.

                   Trinity Lodge, Cambridge, November 26. 1830.

MY DEAR MR. HAMILTON,

I reached this place nine days ago, where I should have found your
letter of the 23d ult., but that it had been forwarded to Coleorton
Hall, Leicestershire, where we stopped a week on our road. I am truly
glad to find that your good spirits put you upon writing what you call
nonsense, and so much of it; but I assure you it all passed with me for
very agreeable sense, or something better, and continues to do so even
in this learned spot; which you will not be surprised to hear, when I
tell you that at a dinner-party the other day, I heard a Head of a
House, a clergyman also, gravely declare, that the rotten boroughs, as
they are called, should instantly be abolished without compensation to
their owners; that slavery should be destroyed with like disregard of
the _claims_ (for rights he would allow none) of the proprietors, and a
multitude of extravagances of the same sort. Therefore say I, Vive la
Bagatelle; motley is your only wear.

[117] _Memoirs_, ii. 230-1.

You tell me kindly that you have often asked yourself where is Mr.
Wordsworth, and the question has readily been solved for you. He is at
Cambridge: a great mistake! So late as the 5th of November, I will tell
you where I was, a solitary equestrian entering the romantic little town
of Ashford in the Waters, on the edge of Wilds of Derbyshire, at the
close of day, when guns were beginning to be left [let?] off and squibs
to be fired on every side. So that I thought it prudent to dismount and
lead my horse through the place, and so on to Bakewell, two miles
farther. You must know how I happened to be riding through these wild
regions. It was my wish that Dora should have the benefit of her pony
while at Cambridge, and very valiantly and economically I determined,
unused as I am to horsemanship, to ride the creature myself. I sent
James with it to Lancaster; there mounted; stopped a day at Manchester,
a week at Coleorton, and so reached the end of my journey safe and
sound, not, however, without encountering two days of tempestuous rain.
Thirty-seven miles did I ride in one day through the worse of these
storms. And what was my resource? guess again: writing verses to the
memory of my departed friend Sir George Beaumont, whose house I had left
the day before. While buffetting the other storm I composed a Sonnet
upon the splendid domain at Chatsworth, which I had seen in the morning,
as contrasted with the secluded habitations of the narrow dells in the
Park; and as I passed through the tame and manufacture-disfigured
country of Lancashire I was reminded by the faded leaves, of Spring, and
threw off a few stanzas of an ode to May.

But too much of self and my own performances upon my steed--a descendant
no doubt of Pegasus, though his owner and present rider knew nothing of
it. Now for a word about Professor Airey. I have seen him twice; but I
did not communicate your message. It was at dinner and at an evening
party, and I thought it best not to speak of it till I saw him, which I
mean to do, upon a morning call.

There is a great deal of intellectual activity within the walls of this
College, and in the University at large; but conversation turns mainly
upon the state of the country and the late change in the administration.
The fires have extended to within 8 miles of this place; from which I
saw one of the worst, if not absolutely the worst, indicated by a
redness in the sky--a few nights ago.

I am glad when I fall in with a member of Parliament, as it puts me upon
writing to my friends, which I am always disposed to defer, without such
a determining advantage. At present we have two members, Mr. Cavendish,
one of the representatives of the University, and Lord Morpeth, under
the Master's roof. We have also here Lady Blanche, wife of Mr.
Cavendish, and sister of Lord Morpeth. She is a great admirer of Mrs.
Hemans' poetry. There is an interesting person in this University for a
day or two, whom I have not yet seen--Kenelm Digby, author of the
'Broadstone of Honor,' a book of chivalry, which I think was put into
your hands at Rydal Mount. We have also a respectable show of blossom in
poetry. Two brothers of the name of Tennison, in particular, are not a
little promising. Of science I can give you no account; though perhaps I
may pick up something for a future letter, which may be long in coming
for reasons before mentioned. Mrs. W. and my daughter, of whom you
inquire, are both well; the latter rides as often as weather and regard
for the age of her pony will allow. She has resumed her German labours,
and is not easily drawn from what she takes to. Therefore I hope Miss
Hamilton will not find fault if she does not write for some time, as she
will readily conceive that with this passion upon her, and many
engagements, she will be rather averse to writing. In fact she owes a
long letter to her brother in Germany, who, by the bye, tells us that he
will not cease to look out for the Book of Kant you wished for.
Farewell, with a thousand kind remembrances to yourself and sister, and
the rest of your amiable family, in which Mrs. W. and Dora join.

                   Believe me most faithfully yours,
                           WM. WORDSWORTH.[118]

[118] Here first printed. G.


72. _Verses: 'Reform Bill:' Francis Edgeworth: Eagles: 'Yarrow
Revisited.'_

                   Rydal Mount, Oct. 27 [1831].

MY DEAR MR. HAMILTON,

A day or two before my return from Scotland arrived your letter and
verses; for both of which I thank you, as they exhibit your mind under
those varied phases which I have great pleasure in contemplating. My
reply is earlier than it would have been, but for the opportunity of a
frank from one of the Members for the University of Oxford--a friend of
Mr. Southey's and mine, who by way of recreating himself after the
fatigues of the last Session, had taken a trip to see the Manchester
railway, and kindly and most unexpectedly came on to give a day apiece
to Southey and me. He is, like myself, in poor heart at the aspect of
public affairs. In his opinion the Ministers when they brought in the
Bill neither expected nor wished it to be carried. All they wanted was
an opportunity of saying to the people, 'Behold what great things we
would have done for you had it been in our power: we must now content
ourselves with the best we can get.' But, to return to your letter. To
speak frankly, you appear to be at least three-fourths gone in love;
therefore, think about the last quarter in the journey. The picture you
give of the lady makes one wish to see her more familiarly than I had an
opportunity of doing, were it only to ascertain whether, as you
astronomers have in your observatories magnifying glasses for the stars,
you do not carry about with you also, when you descend to common life,
coloured glasses and Claude Loraine mirrors for throwing upon objects
that interest you enough for the purpose, such lights and hues as may be
most to the taste of the intellectual vision. In a former letter you
mention Francis Edgeworth. He is a person not to be forgotten. If you be
in communication with him pray present him my very kind respects, and
say that he was not unfrequently in my thoughts during my late poetic
rambles; and particularly when I saw the objects which called forth a
Sonnet that I shall send you. He was struck with my mention of a sound
in the eagle's notes, much and frequently resembling the yelping and
barking of a dog, and quoted a passage in Eschylus where the eagle is
called the flying hound of the air, and he suggested that Eschylus might
not only allude by that term to his being a bird of chase or prey, but
also to this barking voice, which I do not recollect ever hearing
noticed. The other day I was forcibly reminded of the circumstances
under which the pair of eagles were seen that I described in the letter
to Mr. Edgeworth, his brother. It was the promontory of Fairhead, on the
coast of Antrim, and no spectacle could be grander. At Dunally Castle, a
ruin seated at the tip of one of the horns of the bay of Oban, I saw
the other day one of these noble creatures cooped up among the ruins,
and was incited to give vent to my feelings as you shall now see:

    'Dishonoured Rock and Ruin! that by law
    Tyrannic, keep the Bird of Jove imbarred,
    Like a lone criminal whose life is spared.
    Vexed is he and screams loud:--The last I saw
    Was on the wing, and struck my soul with awe,
    Now wheeling low, then with a consort paired,
    From a bold headland their loved aery's guard,
    Flying, above Atlantic waves,--to draw
    Light from the fountain of the setting sun.
    Such was this prisoner once; and, when his plumes
    The sea-blast ruffles as the storm comes on,
    In spirit, for a moment he resumes
    His rank 'mong free-born creatures that live free;
    His power, his beauty, and his majesty.'

You will naturally wish to hear something of Sir Walter Scott, and
particularly of his health. I found him a good deal changed within the
last three or four years, in consequence of some shocks of the
apoplectic kind; but his friends say that he is very much better, and
the last accounts, up to the time of his going on board, were still more
favourable. He himself thinks his age much against him, but he has only
completed his 60th year. But a friend of mine was here the other day,
who has rallied, and is himself again, after a much severer shock, and
at an age several years more advanced. So that I trust the world and his
friends may be hopeful, with good reason, that the life and faculties of
this man, who has during the last six and twenty years diffused more
innocent pleasure than ever fell to the lot of any human being to do in
his own life-time, may be spared. Voltaire, no doubt, was full as
extensively known, and filled a larger space probably in the eye of
Europe; for he was a great theatrical writer, which Scott has not proved
himself to be, and miscellaneous to that degree, that there was
something for all classes of readers: but the pleasure afforded by his
writings, with the exception of some of his Tragedies and minor Poems,
was not pure, and in this Scott is greatly his superior.

As Dora has told your sister, Sir W. was our guide to Yarrow. The
pleasure of that day induced me to add a third to the two poems upon
Yarrow, 'Yarrow Revisited.' It is in the same measure, and as much in
the same spirit as matter of fact would allow. You are artist enough to
know that it is next to impossible entirely to harmonise things that
rest upon their poetic credibility, and are idealised by distance of
time and space, with those that rest upon the evidence of the hour, and
have about them the thorny points of actual life. I am interrupted by a
stranger, and a gleam of fine weather reminds me also of taking
advantage of it the moment I am at liberty, for we have had a week of
incessant rain.

                   [Ever faithfully yours,
                        WM. WORDSWORTH.][119]

[119] _Memoirs_, ii. 241-2. Given completely (instead of the brief
extract) from the original. The autograph, &c. cut away. G.


73. _Tour in Scotland_.

LETTER TO LADY FREDERICK BENTINCK.

                   Rydal Mount, Nov. 9.

MY DEAR LADY FREDERICK,

       *       *       *       *       *

You are quite right, dear Lady F., in congratulating me on my late
ramble in Scotland. I set off with a severe inflammation in one of my
eyes, which was removed by being so much in the open air; and for more
than a month I scarcely saw a newspaper, or heard of their contents.
During this time we almost forgot, my daughter and I, the deplorable
state of the country. My spirits rallied, and, with exercise--for I
often walked scarcely less than twenty miles a day--and the employment
of composing verses, amid scenery the most beautiful, and at a season
when the foliage was most rich and varied, the time flew away
delightfully; and when we came back into the world again, it seemed as
if I had waked from a dream, that never was to return. We travelled in
an open carriage with one horse, driven by Dora; and while we were in
the Highlands I walked most of the way by the side of the carriage,
which left us leisure to observe the beautiful appearances. The rainbows
and coloured mists floating about the hills were more like enchantment
than anything I ever saw, even among the Alps. There was in particular,
the day we made the tour of Loch Lomond in the steamboat, a fragment of
a rainbow, so broad, so splendid, so glorious, with its reflection in
the calm water, it astonished every one on board, a party of foreigners
especially, who could not refrain from expressing their pleasure in a
more lively manner than we are accustomed to do. My object in going to
Scotland so late in the season was to see Sir Walter Scott before his
departure. We stayed with him three days, and he quitted Abbotsford the
day after we left it. His health has undoubtedly been much shattered, by
successive shocks of apoplexy, but his friends say he is so much
recovered, that they entertain good hopes of his life and faculties
being spared. Mr. Lockhart tells me that he derived benefit by a change
of his treatment made by his London physicians, and that he embarked in
good spirits.

As to public affairs, I have no hope but in the goodness of Almighty
God. The Lords have recovered much of the credit they had lost by their
conduct in the Roman Catholic question. As an Englishman I am deeply
grateful for the stand which they have made, but I cannot help fearing
that they may be seduced or intimidated. Our misfortune is, that the
disapprovers of this monstrous bill give way to a belief that nothing
can prevent its being passed; and therefore they submit.

As to the cholera, I cannot say it appals me much; it may be in the
order of Providence to employ this scourge for bringing the nation to
its senses; though history tells us in the case of the plague at Athens,
and other like visitations, that men are never so wicked and depraved as
when afflictions of that kind are upon them. So that, after all, one
must come round to our only support, submission to the will of God, and
faith in the ultimate goodness of His dispensations.

I am sorry you did not mention your son, in whose health and welfare,
and progress in his studies, I am always much interested. Pray remember
me kindly to Lady Caroline. All here join with me in presenting their
kindest remembrances to yourself; and believe me, dear Lady Frederick,

                   Faithfully and affectionately yours,
                          WM. WORDSWORTH.[120]

[120] _Memoirs_, ii. 242-4.


74. _Sir Walter Scott_.

EXTRACT OF LETTER TO MRS. HEMANS.

Rydal Mount, Aug. 20. 1833.

The visit which occasioned the poem ['Yarrow Revisited'] addressed to
Sir Walter Scott, that you mention in terms so flattering, was a very
melancholy one. My daughter was with me. We arrived at his house on
Monday noon, and left it at the same time on Thursday, the very day
before he quitted Abbotsford for London, on his way to Naples. On the
morning of our departure he composed a few lines for Dora's Album, and
wrote them in it. We prize this memorial very much, and the more so as
an affecting testimony of his regard at a time when, as the verses
prove, his health of body and powers of mind were much impaired and
shaken. You will recollect the little green book which you were kind
enough to write in on its first page.

Let me hope that your health will improve, so that you may be enabled to
proceed with the sacred poetry with which you are engaged. Be assured
that I shall duly appreciate the mark of honour you design for me in
connection with so interesting a work.[121]

[121] _Memoirs_, ii. 244.


75. _Of Advices that he would write more in Prose_.

LETTER TO REV. J.K. MILLER, VICAR OF WALKERINGHAM.

                   Rydal Mount, Kendal, Dec. 17. 1831.

MY DEAR SIR,

You have imputed my silence, I trust, to some cause neither disagreeable
to yourself nor unworthy of me. Your letter of the 26th of Nov. had been
misdirected to Penrith, where the postmaster detained it some time,
expecting probably that I should come to that place, which I have often
occasion to visit. When it reached me I was engaged in assisting my wife
to make out some of my mangled and almost illegible MSS., which
inevitably involved me in endeavours to correct and improve them. My
eyes are subject to frequent inflammations, of which I had an attack
(and am still suffering from it) while that was going on. You would
nevertheless have heard from me almost as soon as I received your
letter, could I have replied to it in terms in any degree accordant to
my wishes. Your exhortations troubled me in a way you cannot be in the
least aware of; for I have been repeatedly urged by some of my most
valued friends, and at times by my own conscience, to undertake the task
you have set before me. But I will deal frankly with you. A conviction
of my incompetence to do justice to the momentous subject has kept me,
and I fear will keep me, silent. My sixty-second year will soon be
completed, and though I have been favoured thus far in health and
strength beyond most men of my age, yet I feel its effects upon my
spirits; they sink under a pressure of apprehension to which, at an
earlier period of my life, they would probably have been superior. There
is yet another obstacle: I am no ready master of prose writing, having
been little practised in the art. This last consideration will not weigh
with you; nor would it have done with myself a few years ago; but the
bare mention of it will serve to show that years have deprived me of
_courage_, in the sense the word bears when applied by Chaucer to the
animation of birds in spring time.

What I have already said precludes the necessity of otherwise confirming
your assumption that I am opposed to the spirit you so justly
characterise.[122] To your opinions upon this subject, my judgment (if I
may borrow your own word) 'responds.' Providence is now trying this
empire through her political institutions. Sound minds find their
expediency in principles; unsound, their principles in expediency. On
the proportion of these minds to each other the issue depends. From
calculations of partial expediency in opposition to general principles,
whether those calculations be governed by fear or presumption, nothing
but mischief is to be looked for; but, in the present stage of our
affairs, the class that does the most harm consists _of
well-intentioned_ men, who, being ignorant of human nature, think that
they may help the thorough-paced reformers and revolutionists to a
_certain_ point, then stop, and that the machine will stop with them.
After all, the question is, fundamentally, one of piety and morals; of
piety, as disposing men who are anxious for social improvement to wait
patiently for God's good time; and of morals, as guarding them from
doing evil that good may come, or thinking that any ends _can_ be so
good as to justify wrong means for attaining them. In fact, means, in
the concerns of this life, are infinitely more important than ends,
which are to be valued mainly according to the qualities and virtues
requisite for their attainment; and the best test of an end being good
is the purity of the means, which, by the laws of God and our nature,
must be employed in order to secure it. Even the interests of eternity
become distorted the moment they are looked at through the medium of
impure means. Scarcely had I written this, when I was told by a person
in the Treasury, that it is intended to carry the Reform Bill by a new
creation of peers. If this be done, the constitution of England will be
destroyed, and the present Lord Chancellor, after having contributed to
murder it, may consistently enough pronounce, in his place, its _éloge
funèbre_!

[122] As revolutionary.

I turn with pleasure to the sonnets you have addressed to me and if I
did not read them with unqualified satisfaction it was only from
consciousness that I was unworthy of the enconiums they bestowed upon
me.

Among the papers I have lately been arranging are passages that would
prove as forcibly as anything of mine that has been published, you were
not mistaken in your supposition that it is the habit of my mind
inseparably to connect loftiness of imagination with that humility of
mind which is best taught in Scripture.

Hoping that you will be indulgent to my silence, which has been, from
various causes, protracted contrary to my wish,

                   Believe me to be, dear Sir,
                       Very faithfully yours,
                        WM. WORDSWORTH.[123]

[123] _Memoirs_, ii. 252-4.


76. _Of Poetry and Prose: Milton and Shakspeare: Reform, &c._

LETTER TO PROFESSOR HAMILTON, DUBLIN.

                   Nov. 22. 1831.

MY DEAR MR. HAMILTON,

You send me showers of verses, which I receive with much pleasure, as do
we all; yet have we fears that this employment may seduce you from the
path of Science, which you seem destined to tread with so much honour to
yourself and profit to others. Again and again I must repeat, that the
composition of verse is infinitely more of an art than men are prepared
to believe; and absolute success in it depends upon innumerable
minutiae, which it grieves me you should stoop to acquire a knowledge
of. Milton talks of 'pouring easy his unpremeditated verse.' It would be
harsh, untrue, and odious, to say there is anything like cant in this;
but it is not true to the letter, and tends to mislead. I could point
out to you five hundred passages in Milton upon which labour has been
bestowed, and twice five hundred more to which additional labour would
have been serviceable. Not that I regret the absence of such labour,
because no poem contains more proofs of skill acquired by practice.
These observations are not called out by any defects or imperfections in
your last pieces especially: they are equal to the former ones in
effect, have many beauties, and are not inferior in execution; but again
I do venture to submit to your consideration, whether the poetical parts
of your nature would not find a field more favourable to their exercise
in the regions of prose: not because those regions are humbler, but
because they may be gracefully and profitably trod with footsteps less
careful and in measures less elaborate. And now I have done with the
subject, and have only to add, that when you write verses you would not
fail, from time to time, to let me have a sight of them; provided you
will allow me to defer criticism on your diction and versification till
we meet. My eyes are so often useless both for reading and writing, that
I cannot tax the eyes and pens of others with writing down observations
which to indifferent persons must be tedious.

Upon the whole, I am not sorry that your project of going to London at
present is dropped. It would have grieved me had you been unfurnished
with an introduction from me to Mr. Coleridge; yet I know not how I
could have given you one--he is often so very unwell. A few weeks ago he
had had two attacks of cholera, and appears to be so much broken down
that unless I were assured he was something in his better way I could
not disturb him by the introduction of any one. His most intimate friend
is Mr. Green, a man of science and a distinguished surgeon. If to him
you could procure an introduction he would let you know the state of
Coleridge's health; and to Mr. Green, whom I once saw, you might use my
name with a view to further your wish, if it were at all needful.

Shakspeare's sonnets (excuse this leap) are not upon the Italian model,
which Milton's are; they are merely quatrains with a couplet tacked to
the end; and if they depended much upon the versification they would
unavoidably be heavy.

One word upon Reform in Parliament, a subject to which, somewhat
reluctantly, you allude. You are a Reformer! Are you an approver of the
Bill as rejected by the Lords? or, to use Lord Grey's words, anything
'as efficient?'--he means, if he means anything, for producing change.
Then I earnestly entreat you to devote hours and hours to the study of
human nature, in books, in life, and in your own mind; and beg and pray
that you would mix with society, not in Ireland and Scotland only, but
in England; a fount of destiny which, if once poisoned, away goes all
hope of quiet progress in well doing. The constitution of England, which
seems about to be destroyed, offers to my mind the sublimest
contemplation which the history of society and government have ever
presented to it; and for this cause especially, that its principles have
the character of preconceived ideas, archetypes of the pure intellect,
while they are, in fact, the results of a humble-minded experience.
Think about this, apply it to what we are threatened with, and farewell.

WM. WORDSWORTH.[124]


77. _Of the Reform Bill_.

EXTRACT OF LETTER TO LORD LONSDALE.

                   Rydal Mount, Feb. 17. 1832.

MY LORD,

       *       *       *       *       *

If, after all, I should be asked how I would myself vote, if it had been
my fortune to have a seat in the House of Lords, I must say that I
should oppose the second reading, though with my eyes open to the great
hazard of doing so. My support, however, would be found in standing by a
great _principle_; for, without being unbecomingly personal, I may state
to your Lordship, that it has ever been the habit of my mind to trust
that expediency will come out of fidelity to principles, rather than to
seek my principles of action in calculations of expediency.

[124] _Memoirs_, ii. 255-7, with important additions from the original.
G.

With this observation I conclude, trusting your Lordship will excuse my
having detained you so long.

                   I have the honour to be, most faithfully,
                     Your much obliged,
                         WM. WORDSWORTH.[125]


78. _Of Political Affairs_.

EXTRACT OF LETTER TO LADY FREDERICK BENTINCK.

You were not mistaken in supposing that the state of public affairs has
troubled me much. I cannot see how the government is to be carried on,
but by such sacrifices to the democracy as will, sooner or later, upset
everything. Whoever governs, it will be by out-bidding for popular
favour those who went before them. Sir Robert Peel was obliged to give
way in his government to the spirit of Reform, as it is falsely called;
these men are going beyond him; and if ever he shall come back, it will
only, I fear, be to carry on the movement, in a shape somewhat less
objectionable than it will take from the Whigs. In the mean while the
Radicals or Republicans are cunningly content to have this work done
ostensibly by the Whigs, while in fact they themselves are the Whigs'
masters, as the Whigs well know; but they hope to be preserved from
destruction by throwing themselves back upon the Tories when measures
shall be urged upon them by their masters which they may think too
desperate. What I am most afraid of is, alterations in the constituency,
and in the duration of Parliament, which will bring it more and more
under the dominion of the lower and lowest classes. On this account I
fear the proposed Corporation Reform, as a step towards household
suffrage, vote by ballot, &c. As to a union of the Tories and Whigs in
Parliament, I see no prospect of it whatever. To the great Whig lords
may be truly applied the expression in _Macbeth_,

    'They have eaten of the insane root
    That takes the reason prisoner.'

       *       *       *       *       *

I ordered two copies of my new volume to be sent to Cottesmere. And now
farewell; and believe me,

                   Dear Lady Frederick, ever faithfully yours,
                          W. WORDSWORTH.[126]

[125] _Memoirs_, ii. 257.

[126] _Ibid._ ii. 258-9. Y

79. _Family Affliction and State of Public Affairs_.

LETTER TO THE REV. DR. WORDSWORTH.

                   Rydal Mount, April 1. 1832.

MY DEAR BROTHER,

Our dear sister makes no progress towards recovery of strength. She is
very feeble, never quits her room, and passes most of the day in, or
upon, the bed. She does not suffer much pain, and is very cheerful, and
nothing troubles her but public affairs and the sense of requiring so
much attention. Whatever may be the close of this illness, it will be a
profound consolation to you, my dear brother, and to us all, that it is
borne with perfect resignation; and that her thoughts are such as the
good and pious would wish. She reads much, both religious and
miscellaneous works.

If you see Mr. Watson, remember me affectionately to him.

I was so distressed with the aspect of public affairs, that were it not
for our dear sister's illness, I should think of nothing else. They are
to be envied, I think, who, from age or infirmity, are likely to be
removed from the afflictions which God is preparing for this sinful
nation. God bless you, my brother. John says you are well; so am I, and
every one here except our sister: but I have witnessed one revolution in
a foreign country, and I have not courage to think of facing another in
my own. Farewell. God bless you again.

                   Your affectionate Brother,
                              W.W.[127]

[127] _Memoirs_, ii. 259-60.


80. _Illness of Sister: Reform: Poems: Oxford and Cambridge, &c._

LETTER TO PROFESSOR HAMILTON, DUBLIN.

                   Moresby, June 25. 1832.

MY DEAR MR. HAMILTON,

Your former letter reached me in due time; your second, from Cambridge,
two or three days ago. I ought to have written to you long since, but
really I have for some time, from private and public causes of sorrow
and apprehension, been in a great measure deprived of those genial
feelings which, thro' life, have not been so much accompaniments of my
character, as vital principles of my existence.

My dear sister has been languishing more than seven months in a
sick-room, nor dare I or any of her friends entertain a hope that her
strength will ever be restored; and the course of public affairs, as I
think I told you before, threatens, in my view, destruction to the
institutions of the country; an event which, whatever may rise out of it
hereafter, cannot but produce distress and misery for two or three
generations at least. In any times I am but at best a poor and
unpunctual correspondent, yet I am pretty sure you would have heard from
me but for this reason; therefore let the statement pass for an apology
as far as you think fit.

The verses called forth by your love and the disappointment that
followed I have read with much pleasure, tho' grieved that you should
have suffered so much; as poetry they derive an interest from your
philosophical pursuits, which could not but recommend the verses even to
indifferent readers, and must give them in the eyes of your friends a
great charm. The style appears to me good, and the general flow of the
versification harmonious; but you deal somewhat more in dactylic endings
and identical terminations than I am accustomed to think legitimate.
Sincerely do I congratulate you upon being able to continue your
philosophical pursuits under such a pressure of personal feeling.

It gives me much pleasure that you and Coleridge have met, and that you
were not disappointed in the conversation of a man from whose writings
you had previously drawn so much delight and improvement. He and my
beloved sister are the two beings to whom my intellect is most indebted,
and they are now proceeding, as it were, _pari passu_, along the path of
sickness, I will not say towards the grave, but I trust towards a
blessed immortality.

It was not my intention to write so seriously: my heart is full, and you
must excuse it.

You do not tell me how you like Cambridge as a place, nor what you
thought of its buildings and other works of art. Did you not see Oxford
as well? Surely you would not lose the opportunity; it has greatly the
advantage over Cambridge in its happy intermixture of streets,
churches, and collegiate buildings.

I hope you found time when in London to visit the British Museum.

A fortnight ago I came hither to my son and daughter, who are living a
gentle, happy, quiet, and useful life together. My daughter Dora is also
with us. On this day I should have returned, but an inflammation in my
eyes makes it unsafe for me to venture in an open carriage, the weather
being exceedingly disturbed.

A week ago appeared here Mr. W.S. Landor, the Poet, and author of the
_Imaginary Conversations_, which probably have fallen in your way. We
had never met before, tho' several letters had passed between us; and as
I had not heard that he was in England, my gratification in seeing him
was heightened by surprise. We passed a day together at the house of my
friend Mr. Rawson, on the banks of Wastwater. His conversation is lively
and original; his learning great, tho' he will not allow it, and his
laugh the heartiest I have heard of a long time. It is not much less
than twenty years since he left England for France, and afterwards
Italy, where he hopes to end his days, nay [he has] fixed near Florence
upon the spot where he wishes to be buried. Remember me most kindly to
your sisters. Dora begs her love and thanks to your sister Eliza for her
last most interesting letter, which she will answer when she can command
a frank.

                   Ever faithfully yours,
                        WM. WORDSWORTH.[128]

[Postscript added on first page:] I have desired Messrs. Longman to put
aside for you a copy of the new edition of my poems, compressed into
four vols. It contains nothing but what has before seen the light, but
several poems which were not in the last. Pray direct your Dublin
publisher to apply for it.

[128] _Memoirs_, ii. 260, with important additions from the original.
G.


81. '_Remains of Lucretia Davidson:' Public Events: Miss Jewsbury, &c._

LETTER TO MRS. HEMANS.

                   Rydal Mount, Nov. 22 [1832].

DEAR MRS. HEMANS,

I will not render this sheet more valueless than at best it will prove,
by tedious apologies for not answering your very kind and welcome letter
long and long ago. I received it in London, when my mind was in a most
uneasy state, and when my eyes were useless both for writing and
reading, so that an immediate reply was out of my power; and, since, I
have been doubtful where to address you. Accept this, and something
better, as my excuse, that I have very often thought of you with
kindness and good wishes for your welfare, and that of your fine boys,
who must recommend themselves to all that come in their way. Let me
thank you in Dora's name for your present of _The Remains of Lucretia
Davidson_, a very extraordinary young creature, of whom I had before
read some account in Mr. Southey's review of this volume. Surely many
things, not often bestowed, must concur to make genius an enviable gift.
This truth is painfully forced upon one's attention in reading the
effusions and story of this enthusiast, hurried to her grave so early.
You have, I understand, been a good deal in Dublin. The place I hope has
less of the fever of intellectual, or rather literary, ambition than
Edinburgh, and is less disquieted by factions and cabals of _persons_.
As to those of parties they must be odious and dreadful enough; but
since they have more to do with religion, the adherents of the different
creeds perhaps mingle little together, and so the mischief to social
intercourse, though great, will be somewhat less.

I am not sure but that Miss Jewsbury has judged well in her
determination of going to India. Europe is at present a melancholy
spectacle, and these two Islands are likely to reap the fruit of their
own folly and madness, in becoming, for the present generation, the two
most unquiet and miserable spots upon the earth. May you, my dear
friend, find the advantage of the poetic spirit in raising you, in
thought at least, above the contentious clouds! Never before did I feel
such reason to be grateful for what little inspiration heaven has
graciously bestowed upon my humble intellect. What you kindly wrote
upon the interest you took during your travels in my verses, could not
but be grateful to me, because your own show that in a rare degree you
understand and sympathise with me. We are all well, God be thanked. I am
a wretched correspondent, as this scrawl abundantly shows. I know also,
that you have far too much, both of receiving and writing letters, but I
cannot conclude without expressing a wish, that from time to time you
would let us hear from you and yours, and how you prosper. All join with
me in kindest remembrance to yourself and your boys, especially to
Charles, of whom we know most. Believe me, dear Mrs. Hemans, not the
less for my long silence,

Faithfully and affectionately yours,

WM. WORDSWORTH.[129]


82. _Tuition at the University_.

LETTER TO A NEPHEW.

Rydal Mount, June 17. 1833.

MY DEAR C----,


You are welcome to England after your long ramble. I know not what to
say in answer to your wish for my opinion upon the offer of the
lectureship.

       *       *       *       *       *

I have only one observation to make, to which I should attach importance
if I thought it called for in your case, which I do not. I mean the
moral duty of avoiding to encumber yourself with private pupils in any
number. You are at an age when the blossoms of the mind are setting, to
make fruit; and the practice of _pupil-mongering_ is an absolute blight
for this process. Whatever determination you come to, may God grant that
it proves for your benefit: this prayer I utter with earnestness, being
deeply interested, my dear C----, in all that concerns you. I have said
nothing of the uncertainty hanging over all the establishments,
especially the religious and literary ones of the country, because if
they are to be overturned, the calamity would be so widely spread, that
every mode of life would be involved in it, and nothing survive for
hopeful calculation.

[129] _Memoirs_, ii. 261-2.

We are always delighted to hear of any or all of you. God bless you, my
dear C----.

                   Most faithfully, your affectionate,
                       W. WORDSWORTH.[130]


83. _On the Admission of Dissenters to graduate in the University of
Cambridge_.

                   May 15. 1834.

MY DEAR C----,

You will wonder what is become of us, and I am afraid you will think me
very unworthy the trouble you took in writing to us and sending your
pamphlet. A thousand little things have occurred to prevent my calling
upon Mrs. Wordsworth, who is ever ready to write for me, in respect to
the question that you have so ably handled. Since the night when the
Reform Bill was first introduced, I have been convinced that the
institutions of the country cannot be preserved.... It is a mere
question _of time_. A great majority of the present parliament, I
believe, are in the main favourable to the preservation of the Church,
but among these many are ignorant how that is to be done. Add to the
portion of those who with good intentions are in the dark, the number
who will be driven or tempted to vote against their consciences by the
clamour of their sectarian and infidel constituents under the Reform
Bill, and you will have a daily augmenting power even in this
parliament, which will be more and more hostile to the Church every week
and every day. You will see from the course which my letter thus far has
taken, that I regard the prayer of the Petitioners to whom you are
opposed as formidable still more from the effect which, if granted, it
will ultimately have upon the Church, and through that medium upon the
Monarchy and upon social order, than for its immediate tendency to
introduce discord in the universities, and all those deplorable
consequences which you have so feelingly painted as preparatory to their
destruction.

I am not yet able to use my eyes for reading or writing, but your
pamphlet has been twice read to me....

God bless you....

                   Affectionately yours,
                      WM. WORDSWORTH.[131]

[130] _Memoirs_, ii. 263-4.

[131] _Ibid._ ii. 267-8.

84. _The Poems of Skelton_.

LETTER TO THE REV. ALEXANDER DYCE.

                   Rydal Mount, Kendal, Jan. 7. 1833.

MY DEAR SIR,

Having an opportunity of sending this to town free of postage, I write
to thank you for your last obliging letter. Sincerely do I congratulate
you upon having made such progress with Skelton, a writer deserving of
far greater attention than his works have hitherto received. Your
edition will be very serviceable, and may be the occasion of calling out
illustrations, perhaps, of particular passages from others, beyond what
your own reading, though so extensive, has supplied. I am pleased also
to hear that 'Shirley' is out.

       *       *       *       *       *

I lament to hear that your health is not good. My own, God be thanked,
is excellent; but I am much dejected with the aspect of public affairs,
and cannot but fear that this nation is on the brink of great troubles.

Be assured that I shall at all times be happy to hear of your studies
and pursuits, being, with great respect,

                   Sincerely yours,
                        WM. WORDSWORTH.[132]


85. _The Works of James Shirley_.

LETTER TO THE REV. ALEXANDER DYCE.

                   Rydal Mount, March 20. 1833.

MY DEAR SIR,
I have to thank you for the very valuable present of
Shirley's works, just received. The preface is all that I have
yet had time to read. It pleased me to find that you sympathised
with me in admiration of the passage from the Duchess
of Newcastle's poetry; and you will be gratified to be told that
I have the opinion you have expressed of that cold and false-hearted
Frenchified coxcomb, Horace Walpole.

Poor Shirley! what a melancholy end was his! and then to be so treated
by Dryden! One would almost suspect some private cause of dislike, such
as is said to, have influenced Swift in regard to Dryden himself.

[132] _Memoirs_, ii. 274-5.

Shirley's death reminded me of a sad close of the life of a literary
person, Sanderson by name, in the neighbouring county of Cumberland. He
lived in a cottage by himself, though a man of some landed estate. His
cottage, from want of care on his part, took fire in the night. The
neighbours were alarmed; they ran to his rescue; he escaped, dreadfully
burned, from the flames, and lay down (he was in his seventieth year)
much exhausted under a tree, a few yards from the door. His friends, in
the meanwhile, endeavoured to save what they could of his property from
the flames. He inquired most anxiously after a box in which his
manuscripts and published pieces had been deposited with a view to a
publication of a laboriously-corrected edition; and, upon being told
that the box was consumed, he expired in a few minutes, saying, or
rather sighing out the words, 'Then I do not wish to live.' Poor man!
though the circulation of his works had not extended beyond a circle of
fifty miles' diameter, perhaps, at furthest, he was most anxious to
survive in the memory of the few who were likely to hear of him.

The publishing trade, I understand, continues to be much depressed, and
authors are driven to solicit or invite subscriptions, as being in many
cases the only means for giving their works to the world.

I am always pleased to hear from you; and believe me,

My dear Sir,

                   Faithfully your obliged friend,
                      WM. WORDSWORTH.[133]

86. _Literary Criticism and News: Men of Science, &c._

LETTER TO PROFESSOR HAMILTON, OF DUBLIN.

                   Rydal Mount, May 8. 1833.

MY DEAR SIR,

My letters being of no value but as tokens of friendship, I waited for
the opportunity of a frank, which I had reason to expect earlier.
Sincerely do we all congratulate you upon your marriage. Accept our best
wishes upon the event, and believe that we shall always be deeply
interested in your welfare. Make our kind regards also to Mrs. Hamilton,
who of course will be included in every friendly hope and expectation
formed for yourself.

[133] _Memoirs_, ii. 275-6.

We look with anxiety to your sister Eliza's success in her schemes,--but
for pecuniary recompense in literature, especially poetical, nothing can
be more unpromising than the present state of affairs, except what we
have to fear for the future. Mrs. Godwyn, who sends verses to Blackwood,
is our neighbour. I have had no conversation with her myself upon the
subject, but a friend of hers says she has reason to believe that she
has got nothing but a present of books. This however is of no moment, as
Mrs. G. being a person of easy fortune she has not probably bargained
for a return in money. Mrs. Hemans I see continues to publish in the
periodicals. If you ever see her, pray remember me affectionately to
her, and tell her that I have often been, and still am, troubled in
conscience for having left her obliging letter so long unanswered; but
she must excuse me as there is not a motive in my mind urging me to
throw any interest into my letters to friends beyond the expression of
kindness and esteem; and _that_ she does not require from me. Besides my
friends in general know how much I am hindered in all my pursuits by the
inflammation to which my eyes are so frequently subject. I have long
since given up all exercise of them by candle-light, and the evenings
and nights are the seasons when one is most disposed to converse in that
way with absent friends. News you do not care about, and I have none for
you, except what concerns friends. My sister, God be thanked, has had a
respite. She can now walk a few steps about her room, and has been borne
twice into the open air. Southey to whom I sent your Sonnets had, I
grieve to say, a severe attack of some unknown and painful complaint,
about ten days ago. It weakened him much, but he is now I believe
perfectly recovered. Coleridge I have reason to think is confined to his
bed; his mind vigorous as ever. Your Sonnets I think are as good as
anything you have done in verse. We like the 2d best; and I single it
out the more readily as it allows me an opportunity of reminding you of
what I have so often insisted upon, the extreme care which is necessary
in the composition of poetry.

    'The ancient image _shall not_ depart
    From my soul's temple, the refined gold
    Already prov'd _remain_.'

Your meaning is that it shall remain, but according to the construction
of our language, you have said 'it shall not.'

    'The refined gold,
    Well proved, shall then remain,'

will serve to explain my objection.

Could not you take us in your way coming or going to Cambridge? If Mrs.
H. accompanies you, we should be glad to see her also.

I hope that in the meeting about to take place in Cambridge there will
be less of mutual flattery among the men of science than appeared in
that of the last year at Oxford. Men of science in England seem, indeed,
to copy their fellows in France, by stepping too much out of their way
for titles, and baubles of that kind, and for offices of state and
political struggles, which they would do better to keep out of.

With kindest regards to yourself and Mrs. H., and to your sisters,
believe me ever,

My dear Mr. H.,
                   Faithfully yours,
                        W.W.[134]

[134] _Memoirs_, ii. 276-7, with important additions from the original.


87. _Of 'Elia:' Miss Wordsworth_.

LETTER TO CHARLES LAMB, ESQ.

                   Rydal Mount [Friday, May 17. 1833, or thereabouts].

MY DEAR LAMB,

I have to thank you and Moxon for a delightful volume, your last (I hope
not) of 'Elia.' I have read it all except some of the 'Popular
Fallacies,' which I reserve.... The book has much pleased the whole of
my family, viz. my wife, daughter, Miss Hutchinson, and my poor dear
sister, on her sick bed; they all return their best thanks. I am not
sure but I like the 'Old China,' and the 'Wedding,' as well as any of
the Essays. I read 'Love me and my Dog' to my poor sister this morning.

       *       *       *       *       *

I have been thus particular, knowing how much you and your dear sister
value this excellent person, whose tenderness of heart I do not honestly
believe was ever exceeded by any of God's creatures. Her loving-kindness
has no bounds. God bless her for ever and ever! Again thanking you for
your excellent book, and wishing to know how you and your dear sister
are, with best love to you both from us all,

                   I remain, my dear Lamb,
                        Your faithful friend,
                           W. WORDSWORTH.[135]


88. _'Specimens of English Sonnets:' Criticisms, &c._

LETTER TO THE REV. ALEXANDER DYCE.

                   [No date to this Letter, but written in 1833.]

MY DEAR SIR,

The dedication[136] which you propose I shall esteem as an honour; nor
do I conceive upon what ground, but an over-scrupulous modesty, I could
object to it.

[135] _Memoirs_, ii. 277-8.

[136] I had requested permission to dedicate a little book, _Specimens
of English Sonnets_, to Mr. W. _A.D._

Be assured that Mr. Southey will not have the slightest unwillingness to
your making any use you think proper of his 'Memoir of Bampfylde:' I
shall not fail to mention the subject to him upon the first opportunity.

You propose to give specimens of the best _sonnet-writers_ in our
language. May I ask if by this be meant a selection of the _best
sonnets, best_ both as to _kind_ and _degree_? A sonnet may be excellent
in its kind, but that kind of very inferior interest to one of a higher
order, though not perhaps in every minute particular quite so well
executed, and from the pen of a writer of inferior genius. It should
seem that the best rule to follow would be, first, to pitch upon the
sonnets which are best _both_ in kind and perfectness of execution, and,
next, those which, although of a humbler quality, are admirable for the
finish and happiness of the execution, taking care to exclude all those
which have not one or other of these recommendations, however striking
they might be, as characteristic of the age in which the author lived,
or some peculiarity of his manner. The 10th sonnet of Donne, beginning
'Death, be not proud,' is so eminently characteristic of his manner, and
at the same time so weighty in the thought, and vigorous in the
expression, that I would entreat you to insert it, though to modern
taste it may be repulsive, quaint, and laboured. There are two sonnets
of Russell, which, in all probability, you may have noticed, 'Could,
then, the babes,' and the one upon Philoctetes, the last six lines of
which are first-rate. Southey's 'Sonnet to Winter' pleases me much; but,
above all, among modern writers, that of Sir Egerton Brydges, upon 'Echo
and Silence.' Miss Williams's 'Sonnet upon Twilight' is pleasing; that
upon 'Hope' of great merit.

Do you mean to have a short preface upon the construction of the sonnet?
Though I have written so many, I have scarcely made up my own mind upon
the subject. It should seem that the sonnet, like every other legitimate
composition, ought to have a beginning, a middle, and an end; in other
words, to consist of three parts, like the three propositions of a
syllogism, if such an illustration may be used. But the frame of metre
adopted by the Italians does not accord with this view; and, as adhered
to by them, it seems to be, if not arbitrary, best fitted to a division
of the sense into two parts, of eight and six lines each. Milton,
however, has not submitted to this; in the better half of his sonnets
the sense does not close with the rhyme at the eighth line, but
overflows into the second portion of the metre. Now it has struck me
that this is not done merely to gratify the ear by variety and freedom
of sound, but also to aid in giving that pervading sense of intense
unity in which the excellence of the sonnet has always seemed to me
mainly to consist. Instead of looking at this composition as a piece of
architecture, making a whole out of three parts, I have been much in the
habit of preferring the image of an orbicular body,--a sphere, or a
dew-drop. All this will appear to you a little fanciful; and I am well
aware that a sonnet will often be found excellent, where the beginning,
the middle, and the end are distinctly marked, and also where it is
distinctly separated into _two_ parts, to which, as I before observed,
the strict Italian model, as they write it, is favourable. Of this last
construction of sonnet, Russell's upon 'Philoctetes' is a fine specimen;
the first eight lines give the hardship of the case, the six last the
consolation, or the _per-contra_.

Ever faithfully

                   Your much obliged friend and servant,
                          W. WORDSWORTH.

P.S. In the case of the Cumberland poet, I overlooked a most pathetic
circumstance. While he was lying under the tree, and his friends were
saving what they could from the flames, he desired them to bring out the
box that contained his papers, if possible. A person went back for it,
but the bottom dropped out, and the papers fell into the flames and were
consumed. Immediately upon hearing this, the poor old man expired.[137]


89. _The Poems of Lady Winchelsea, Skelton, &c._

LETTER TO THE REV. ALEXANDER DYCE.

                   Lowther Castle, Sept. 23 [qu. Aug. 1833.
                               No date of the Year.]

MY DEAR SIR,

I have put off replying to your obliging letter till I could procure a
frank; as I had little more to say than to thank you for your attention
to Lady Winchelsea,[138] and for the extracts you sent me.

[137] _Memoirs_, ii. 278-81.

[138] _i.e._ To Mr. W.'s request that I would, if possible, furnish him
with some particulars about her. _A.D._

I expected to find at this place my friend, Lady Frederick Bentinck,
through whom I intended to renew my request for materials, if any exist,
among the Finch family, whether manuscript poems, or anything else that
would be interesting; but Lady F., unluckily, is not likely to be in
Westmoreland. I shall, however, write to her. Without some additional
materials, I think I should scarcely feel strong enough to venture upon
any species of publication connected with this very interesting woman,
notwithstanding the kind things you say of the value of my critical
remarks.

I am glad you have taken Skelton in hand, and much wish I could be of
any use to you. In regard to his life, I am certain of having read
somewhere (I thought it was in Burns's 'History of Cumberland and
Westmoreland,' but I am mistaken), that Skelton was born at Branthwaite
Hall, in the county of Cumberland. Certain it is that a family of that
name possessed the place for many generations; and I own it would give
me some pleasure to make out that Skelton was a brother Cumbrian.
Branthwaite Hall is about six miles from Cockermouth, my native place.
Tickell (of the _Spectator_), one of the best of our minor poets, as
Johnson has truly said, was born within two miles of the same town.
These are mere accidents, it is true, but I am foolish enough to attach
some interest to them.

If it would be more agreeable to you, I would mention your views in
respect to Skelton to Mr. Southey: I should have done so before, but it
slipped my memory when I saw him. Mr. Southey is undoubtedly much
engaged, but I cannot think that he would take ill a letter from you on
any literary subject. At all events, I shall, in a few days, mention
your intention of editing Skelton, and ask if he has anything to
suggest.

I meditate a little tour in Scotland this autumn, my principal object
being to visit Sir Walter Scott; but as I take my daughter along with
me, we probably shall go to Edinburgh, Glasgow, and take a peep at the
western Highlands. This will not bring us near Aberdeen.[139] If it
suited you to return to town by the Lakes, I should be truly glad to see
you at Rydal Mount, near Ambleside. You might, at all events, call on
Mr. Southey in your way; I would prepare an introduction for you, by
naming your intention to Mr. S. I have added this, because my Scotch
tour would, I fear, make it little likely that I should be at home about
the 10th September. Your return, however, may be deferred.

                   Believe me, my dear Sir,
                    Very respectfully, your obliged,
                        W. WORDSWORTH.

P.S. I hope your health continues good. I assure you there was no want
of interest in your conversation on that or any other account.[140]

[139] Where I then was. _A.D._

[140] _Memoirs_, ii. 281-3.


90. _'Popularity' of Poetry_.

LETTER TO E. MOXON, ESQ.

                   Lowther Castle, Westmoreland, Aug. 1833.
MY DEAR MR. MOXON,

       *       *       *       *       *

There does not appear to be much genuine relish for poetical
publications in Cumberland, if I may judge from the fact of not a copy
of my poems having been sold there by one of the leading booksellers,
though Cumberland is my native county. Byron and Scott are, I am
persuaded, the only _popular_ writers in that line,--perhaps the word
ought rather to be that they are _fashionable_ writers.

My poor sister is something better in health. Pray remember me very
affectionately to Charles Lamb, and to his dear sister, if she be in a
state to receive such communications from her friends. I hope Mr. Rogers
is well; give my kindest regards to him also.

                   Ever, my dear Mr. Moxon,
                        Faithfully yours,
                             W. WORDSWORTH.[141]


91. _Sonnets, and less-known female Poets: Hartley Coleridge, &c._

LETTER TO THE REV. ALEXANDER DYCE. /$ Rydal Mount, Dec. 4. 1833.

MY DEAR SIR, $/

Your elegant volume of Sonnets,[142] which you did me the honour to
dedicate to me, was received a few months after the date of the
accompanying letter; and the copy for Mr. Southey was forwarded
immediately, as you may have learned long ago, by a letter from himself.
Supposing you might not be returned from Scotland, I have deferred
offering my thanks for this mark of your attention: and about the time
when I should otherwise probably have written, I was seized with an
inflammation in my eyes, from the _effects_ of which I am not yet so far
recovered as to make it prudent for me to use them in writing or
reading.[143]

[141] _Memoirs_, ii. 283.

[142] _Specimens of English Sonnets. A.D._

[143] This letter is in the handwriting of Miss D. Wordsworth, but
signed by Mr. W. _A.D._

The selection of sonnets appears to me to be very judicious. If I were
inclined to make an exception, it would be in the single case of the
sonnet of Coleridge upon 'Schiller,' which is too much of a rant for my
taste. The one by him upon 'Linley's Music' is much superior in
execution; indeed, as a strain of feeling, and for unity of effect, it
is very happily done. I was glad to see Mr. Southey's 'Sonnet to
Winter.' A lyrical poem of my own, upon the disasters of the French army
in Russia, has so striking a resemblance to it, in contemplating winter
under two aspects, that, in justice to Mr. Southey, who preceded me, I
ought to have acknowledged it in a note; and I shall do so upon some
future occasion.

How do you come on with Skelton? And is there any prospect of a new
edition of your _Specimens of British Poetesses_? If I could get at the
original works of the elder poetesses, such as the Duchess of Newcastle,
Mrs. Behn, Orinda, &c., I should be happy to assist you with my judgment
in such a publication, which, I think, might be made still more
interesting than this first edition, especially if more matter were
crowded into a page. The two volumes of _Poems by Eminent Ladies_, Helen
Maria Williams's works, Mrs. Smith's Sonnets, and Lady Winchelsea's
Poems, form the scanty materials which I possess for assisting such a
publication.

It is a remarkable thing, that the two best ballads, perhaps, of modern
times, viz. 'Auld Robin Grey' and the 'Lament for the Defeat of the
Scots at Flodden-field,' are both from the pens of females.

I shall be glad to hear that your health is improved, and your spirits
good, so that the world may continue to be benefited by your judicious
and tasteful labours.

Pray let me hear from you at your leisure; and believe me, dear Sir,

                   Very faithfully yours,
                           W. WORDSWORTH.

P.S. It is a pity that Mr. Hartley Coleridge's Sonnets had not been
published before your Collection was made, as there are several well
worthy of a place in it. Last midsummer I made a fortnight's tour in the
Isle of Man, Staffa, Iona, &c., which produced between thirty and forty
sonnets, some of which, I think, would please you.

Could not you contrive to take the Lakes in your way, sometimes, to or
from Scotland? I need not say how glad I should be to see you for a few
days.

What a pity that Mr. Heber's wonderful collection of books is about to
be dispersed![144]

[144] _Memoirs_, ii. 284-6.

92. _Proposed Dedication of Poems to Wordsworth_.

LETTER TO MRS. HEMANS.

                   Rydal Mount, April 1834.

MY DEAR MRS. HEMANS,
       *       *       *       *       *

You have submitted what you intended as a dedication of your poems to
me. I need scarcely say that, as a _private letter_, such expressions
from such a quarter could not have been received by me but with pleasure
of _no ordinary kind_, unchecked by any consideration but the fear that
my writings were overrated by you, and my character thought better of
than it deserved. But I must say, that a _public_ testimony, in so high
a strain of admiration, is what I cannot but shrink from: be this
modesty true or false, it is in me; you must bear with it, and make
allowance for it. And, therefore, as you have submitted the whole to my
judgment, I am emboldened to express a wish that you would, instead of
this dedication, in which your warm and kind heart has overpowered you,
simply inscribe them to me, with such expression of respect or gratitude
as would come within the limits of the rule which, after what has been
said above, will naturally suggest itself. Of course, if the sheet has
been struck off, I must hope that my shoulders may become a little more
Atlantean than I now feel them to be.

My sister is not quite so well. She, Mrs. W., and Dora, all unite with
me in best wishes and kindest remembrances to yourself and yours; and

                   Believe me, dear Mrs. Hemans,
                     To remain faithfully yours,
                           WM. WORDSWORTH.[145]

[145] _Memoirs_, ii. 286-7.



93. _Verse-Attempts_.

LETTER TO LIEUTENANT-GENERAL SIR WM. M. GOMM.

                   Rydal Mount, April 16. 1834.

MY DEAR SIR,

Your verses, for which I sincerely thank you, are an additional proof of
the truth which forced from me, many years ago, the exclamation, 'O,
many are the poets that are sown by nature!'[146] The rest of that
paragraph also has some bearing upon your position in the poetical
world. The thoughts and images through both the poems, and the feelings
also, are eminently such as become their several subjects; but it would
be insincerity were I to omit adding, that there is here and there a
want of that skill in _workmanship_, which I believe nothing but
continued practice in the art can bestow. I have used the word _art_,
from a conviction, which I am called upon almost daily to express, that
poetry is infinitely more of an art than the world is disposed to
believe. Nor is this any dishonour to it; both for the reason that the
poetic faculty is not rarely bestowed, and for this cause, also, that
men would not be disposed to ascribe so much to inspiration, if they did
not feel how near and dear to them poetry is.

[146] _Excursion_, book i.

With sincere regards and best wishes to yourself and Lady Gomm,

                   Believe me to be very sincerely yours,
                           W. WORDSWORTH.[147]

[147] _Memoirs_, ii. 287-8.


94. _The Poems of Mrs. Hemans_.

LETTER TO MRS. HEMANS.

                   Rydal Mount, Sept. 1834.

MY DEAR MRS. HEMANS,

I avail myself gladly of the opportunity of Mr. Graves's return, to
acknowledge the honour you have done me in prefixing my name to your
volume of beautiful poems, and to thank you for the copy you have sent
me with your own autograph. Where there is so much to admire, it is
difficult to select; and therefore I shall content myself with naming
only two or three pieces. And, first, let me particularise the piece
that stands second in the volume, 'Flowers and Music in a Sick Room.'
This was especially touching to me, on my poor sister's account, who has
long been an invalid, confined almost to her chamber. The feelings are
sweetly touched throughout this poem, and the imagery very beautiful;
above all, in the passage where you describe the colour of the petals of
the wild rose. This morning, I have read the stanzas upon 'Elysium' with
great pleasure. You have admirably expanded the thought of
Chateaubriand. If we had not been disappointed in our expected pleasure
of seeing you here, I should have been tempted to speak of many other
passages and poems with which I have been delighted.

Your health, I hope,[148] is by this time reëstablished. Your son,
Charles, looks uncommonly well, and we have had the pleasure of seeing
him and his friends several times; but as you are aware, we are much
engaged with visitors at this season of the year, so as not always to be
able to follow our inclinations as to whom we would wish to see. I
cannot conclude without thanking you for your Sonnet upon a place so
dear to me as Grasmere: it is worthy of the subject. With kindest
remembrances, in which unite Mrs. W., my sister, and Dora, I remain,
dear Mrs. Hemans,

                   Your much obliged friend,
                      WM. WORDSWORTH.

I have written very hastily to spare my eyes; a liberty which you will
excuse.[149]

[148] This hope, alas! was not realised. Mrs. Hemans died in the
following year, May 16, 1835.

[149] _Memoirs_, ii. 291-2.


95. _Of the Church of England, &c._

LETTER TO THE VENERABLE ARCHDEACON WRANGHAM.

                   Rydal Mount, Feb. 2. 1835.

MY DEAR WRANGHAM,

Sincere thanks are due from me for the attention you paid to Mrs. W.'s
letter, written during my absence. You know the favourable opinion I
entertain of Mr. Graves; and I was under a promise to let him know, if
any vacancy occurred in the neighbourhood, and to do all I could,
without infringing upon prior or stronger claims, to promote the
attainment of his wishes.

       *       *       *       *       *

The mind of every thinking man who is attached to the Church of England
must at this time be especially turned to reflections upon all points of
ecclesiastical polity, government, and management, which may tend to
strengthen the Establishment in the affections of the people, and
enlarge the sphere of its efficiency. It cannot, then, I feel, be
impertinent in me, though a layman, to express upon this occasion my
satisfaction, qualified as it is by what has been said above, in
finding from this instance that our diocesan is unwilling to station
clergymen in cures with which they are locally connected. Some years
ago, when the present Bishop of London, then of Chester, was residing in
this neighbourhood, I took the liberty of strenuously recommending to
him not to ordain young men to curacies where they had been brought up,
or in the midst of their own relatives. I had seen too much of the
mischief of this, especially as affecting the functions and characters
of ministers born and bred up in the lower classes of society. It has
been painful to me to observe the false position, as the French would
call it, in which men so placed are. Their habits, their manners, and
their talk, their acquaintanceships, their friendships, and, let me say,
their domestic affections, naturally and properly draw them one way,
while their professional obligations point out another; and,
accordingly, if they are sensible of both, they live in a perpetual
conflict, and are liable to be taxed with pride and ingratitude, as
seeming to neglect their old friends, when they only associate with them
with that reserve, and under those restraints, which their sacred
profession enjoins. If, on the other hand, they fall into unrestrained
familiarity with the associates of their earlier life and boyish days,
how injurious to their ministry such intercourse would be, must flash
upon every man's mind whose thoughts have turned for a moment to the
subject. Allow me to add a word upon the all-important matter of
testimonials. The case of the Rector of ---- and of ---- presses it
closely upon my mind. Had the individuals who signed those documents
been fitly impressed with the awfullness of the act they were about to
engage in, they could not have undertaken it.... Would it not be a good
plan for bishops to exclude testimonials from relatives and near
connections? It is painful to notice what a tendency there is in men's
minds to allow even a slight call of private regard to outweigh a very
strong claim of duty to the public, and not less in sacred concerns than
in civil.

Your hands, my dear friend, have failed, as well as my eyes, so that we
are neither of us in very flourishing trim for active correspondence: be
assured, however, I participate the feelings you express. Last year has
robbed me of Coleridge, of Charles Lamb, James Losh, Rudd, of Trinity,
Fleming, just gone, and other schoolfellows and contemporaries. I cannot
forget that Shakspeare, who scarcely survived fifty (I am now near the
close of my sixty-fifth year), wrote,

    'In me that time of life thou dost behold,
    When yellow leaves, or few, or none, do hang
    Upon the bough.'

How much more reason have we to break out into such a strain! Let me
hear from you from time to time; I shall feel a lively interest in all
that concerns you. I remain faithfully yours,

                                      W.W.[150]

[150] _Memoirs_, ii. 292-4.


96. _Of 'The Omnipresence of the Deity,' &c._

LETTER TO THE REV. ROBERT MONTGOMERY.

                   Feb. 1835.

MY DEAR SIR,

On my return home, after an absence of some length, I have had the
pleasure of receiving your two volumes.

       *       *       *       *       *

With your 'Omnipresence of the Deity'[151] I was acquainted long ago,
having read it and other parts of your writings with much pleasure,
though with some abatement, such as you yourself seem sufficiently aware
of, and which, in the works of so young a writer, were by me gently
judged, and in many instances regarded, though in themselves faults, as
indications of future excellence. In your letter, for which also I thank
you, you allude to your Preface, and desire to know if my opinion
concurs with yours on the subject of sacred poetry. That Preface has
been read to me, and I can answer in the affirmative; but at the same
time allow me frankly to tell you that what _most_ pleased me in that
able composition is to be found in the few concluding paragraphs,
beginning 'It is now seven years since,' &c.

[151] Mr. Montgomery informed the (now) Bishop of Lincoln that 'this
poem when forwarded to Wordsworth was not in the condition in which it
is now, but that it had been almost rewritten, and was also his earliest
poem--composed when he was nineteen.' G.

       *       *       *       *       *

I cannot conclude without one word of literary advice, which I hope you
will deem my advanced age entitles me to give. Do not, my dear Sir, be
anxious about any individual's opinion concerning your writings, however
highly you may think of his genius or rate his judgment. Be a severe
critic to yourself; and depend upon it no person's decision upon the
merit of your works will bear comparison in point of value with your
own. You must be conscious from what feeling they have flowed, and how
far they may or may not be allowed to claim, on that account, permanent
respect; and, above all, I would remind you, with a view to tranquillise
and steady your mind, that no man takes the trouble of surveying and
pondering another's writings with a hundredth part of the care which an
author of sense and genius will have bestowed upon his own. Add to this
reflection another, which I press upon you, as it has supported me
through life, viz. that Posterity will settle all accounts justly, and
that works which deserve to last will last; and if undeserving this
fate, the sooner they perish the better.

                   Believe me to be faithfully,
                       Your much obliged,
                           W. WORDSWORTH.[152]

[152] _Memoirs, ii_. 294-6.


97. _A new Church at Cockermouth_.

LETTER TO JAMES STANGER, ESQ.

MY DEAR SIR,

The obstacle arising out of conflicting opinions in regard to the
patronage, one must be prepared for in every project of this kind.
Mutual giving-way is indispensable, and I hope it will not ultimately be
wanting in this case.

The point immediately to be attended to is the raising a sufficient sum
to insure from the Church Building Societies a portion of the surplus
fund which they have at command, and which I know, on account of claims
from many places, they are anxious to apply as speedily as possible. If
time be lost, that sum will be lost to Cockermouth.

In the question of the patronage as between the bishop and the people, I
entirely concur with you in preference of the former. Such is now the
force of public opinion, that bishops are not likely to present upon
merely selfish considerations; and if the judgment of one be not good,
that of his successor may make amends, and probably will. But elections
of this sort, when vested in the inhabitants, have, as far as my
experience goes, given rise to so many cabals and manoeuvres, and caused
such enmities and heart-burnings, that Christian charity has been
driven out of sight by them: and how often, and how soon, have the
successful party been seen to repent of their own choice!

The course of public affairs being what it is in respect to the Church,
I cannot reconcile myself to delay from a hope of succeeding at another
time. If we can get a new church erected at Cockermouth, great will be
the benefit, with the blessing of God, to that place; and our success
cannot, I trust, but excite some neighbouring places to follow the
example.

The little that I can do in my own sphere shall be attempted
immediately, with especial view to insure the cooperation of the
societies. Happy should I be if you and other gentlemen would
immediately concur in this endeavour.

                   I remain, &c.
                      WM. WORDSWORTH.[153]


98. _Of the Same_.

                   Rydal Mount, Jan. 1836.
MY DEAR C----,

Now let me tell you, but more for your father's sake than yours, that in
a letter which I received from Lord Lonsdale yesterday he generously
proposes to endow a new church at Cockermouth with 150_l._ per annum.
From a conversation with him in the autumn, I expected he would do as
much, though he did not then permit me, as he has done now, to mention
it publicly.[154]


99. _Classic Scenes: Holy Land_.

We often think with much interest of your sister Eliza, and with a
thousand good wishes that her bold adventure may turn out well. If she
finds herself at liberty to move about, her sensitive, imaginative, and
thoughtful mind cannot but be profitably excited and substantially
enriched by what she will see in that most interesting part of the world
(Smyrna, and the coast of Asia Minor). How should I like, old as I am,
to visit those classic shores and the Holy Land, with all its
remembrances so sweet and solemn![155]

[153] _Memoirs_, ii. 296-7.

[154] Extract: _Memoirs_, ii. 298.

[155] Extract of letter to Sir W.R. Hamilton, Dublin, Jan. 11, 1836.
Here first printed.

100. _American Edition of Poems, &c_ LETTER TO PROFESSOR HENRY REED, OF
PHILADELPHIA.

                   London, August 19 [1837].

My Dear Sir,

Upon returning from a tour of several months upon the Continent, I find
two letters from you awaiting my arrival, along with the edition of my
Poems you have done me the honour of editing. To begin with the former
letter, April 25, 1836: It gives me concern that you should have thought
it necessary (not to _apologise_, for that you have not done, but) to
explain at length why you addressed me in the language of affectionate
regard. It must surely be gratifying to one, whose aim as an author has
been the hearts of his fellow-creatures of all ranks and in all
stations, to find that he has succeeded in any quarter; and still more
must he be gratified to learn that he has pleased in a distant country
men of simple habits and cultivated taste, who are at the same time
widely acquainted with literature. Your second letter, accompanying the
edition of the Poems, I have read, but unluckily have it not before me.
It was lent to Serjeant Talfourd, on account of the passage in it that
alludes to the possible and desirable establishment of English copyright
in America. I shall now hasten to notice the edition which you have
superintended of my Poems. This I can do with much pleasure, as the
book, which has been shown to several persons of taste, Mr. Rogers in
particular, is allowed to be far the handsomest specimen of printing in
double columns which they have seen. Allow me to thank you for the pains
you have bestowed upon the work. Do not apprehend that any difference in
our several arrangements of the poems can be of much importance; you
appear to understand me far too well for that to be possible. I have
only to regret, in respect to this volume, that it should have been
published before my last edition, in the correction of which I took
great pains, as my last labour in that way, and which moreover contains
several additional pieces. It may be allowed me also to express a hope
that such a law will be passed ere long by the American legislature, as
will place English authors in general upon a better footing in America
than at present they have obtained, and that the protection of copyright
between the two countries will be reciprocal. The vast circulation of
English works in America offers a temptation for hasty and incorrect
printing; and that same vast circulation would, without adding to the
price of each copy of an English work in a degree that could be grudged
or thought injurious by any purchaser, allow an American remuneration,
which might add considerably to the comforts of English authors, who may
be in narrow circumstances, yet who at the same time may have written
solely from honourable motives. Besides, Justice is the foundation on
which both law and practice ought to rest.

Having many letters to write on returning to England after so long an
absence, I regret that I must be so brief on the present occasion. I
cannot conclude, however, without assuring you that the acknowledgments
which I receive from the vast continent of America are among the most
grateful that reach me. What a vast field is there open to the English
mind, acting through our noble language! Let us hope that our authors of
true genius will not be unconscious of that thought, or inattentive to
the duty which it imposes upon them, of doing their utmost to instruct,
to purify, and to elevate their readers. That such may be my own
endeavour through the short time I shall have to remain in this world,
is a prayer in which I am sure you and your life's partner will join me.
Believe me gratefully,

                   Your much obliged friend,
                       W. WORDSWORTH.[156]


101. _Of the Poems of Quillinan, and Revision of his own Poems_.

LETTER TO EDWARD QUILLINAN, ESQ.

                   Brinsop Court, Sept. 20. 1837.

MY DEAR MR. QUILLINAN,

We are heartily glad to learn from your letter, just received, that, in
all probability, by this time, you must have left the unhappy country in
which you have been so long residing. I should not have been sorry if
you had entered a little more into Peninsular politics; for what is
going on there is shocking to humanity, and one would be glad to see
anything like an opening for the termination of these unnatural
troubles.

[156] _Memoirs_, ii. 344-6.

The position of the Miguelites, relatively to the conflicting, so
called, liberal parties, is just what I apprehended, and expressed very
lately to Mr. Robinson....

He came down with us to Hereford with a view to a short tour on the
banks of the Wye, which has been prevented by an unexpected attack of my
old complaint of inflammation in the eye; and in consequence of this,
Dora will accompany me home, with a promise on her part of returning to
London before the month of October is out. Our places are taken in
to-morrow's coach for Liverpool; so that, since we must be disappointed
of seeing you and Jemima here, we trust that you will come on to Rydal
from Leeds. This very day Dora had read to me your poem again: it
convinces me, along with your other writings, that it is in your power
to attain a permanent place among the poets of England. Your thoughts,
feelings, knowledge, and judgment in style, and skill in metre, entitle
you to it; and, if you have not yet succeeded in gaining it, the cause
appears to me merely to lie in the subjects which you have chosen. It is
worthy of note how much of Gray's popularity is owing to the happiness
with which his subject is selected in three places, his 'Hymn to
Adversity,' his 'Ode on the distant Prospect of Eton College,' and his
'Elegy.' I ought, however, in justice to you, to add, that one cause of
your failure appears to have been thinking too humbly of yourself, so
that you have not reckoned it worth while to look sufficiently round you
for the best subjects, or to employ as much time in reflecting,
condensing, bringing out and placing your thoughts and feelings in the
best point of view as is necessary. I will conclude this matter of
poetry and my part of the letter, with requesting that, as an act of
friendship, at your convenience, you would take the trouble--a
considerable one, I own--of comparing the corrections in my last edition
with the text in the preceding one. You know my principles of style
better, I think, than any one else; and I should be glad to learn if
anything strikes you as being altered for the worse. You will find the
principal changes are in 'The White Doe,' in which I had too little of
the benefit of your help and judgment. There are several also in the
Sonnets, both miscellaneous and political: in the other poems they are
nothing like so numerous; but here also I should be glad if you would
take the like trouble. Jemima, I am sure, will be pleased to assist you
in the comparison, by reading, new or old, as you may think fit. With
love to her, I remain,

My dear Mr. Quillinan,

                   Faithfully yours,
                      WILLIAM WORDSWORTH.[157]


102. _On a Tour_.

LETTER TO THE EARL OF LONSDALE.

After having had excellent health during my long ramble [in
Herefordshire], it is unfortunate that I should thus be disabled at the
conclusion. The mischief came to me in Herefordshire, whither I had gone
on my way home to see my brother-in-law, who, by his horse falling with
him some time ago, was left without the use of his limbs.

I was lately a few days with Mr. Rogers, at Broadstairs, and also with
the Archbishop of Canterbury, at Addington Park; they were both well,
and I was happy to see the Archbishop much stronger than his slender and
almost feeble appearance would lead one to expect. We walked up and down
in the park for three hours one day, and nearly four the next, without
his seeming to be the least fatigued. I mention this as we must all feel
the value of his life in this state of public affairs.

The cholera prevented us getting as far as Naples, which was the only
disappointment we met with. As a man of letters I have to regret that
this most interesting tour was not made by me earlier in life, as I
might have turned the notices it has supplied me with to more account
than I now expect to do. With respectful remembrances to Lady Lonsdale,
and to your Lordship, in which Mrs. W. unites,

                   I remain, my dear Lord, faithfully,
                       Your much obliged servant,
                           WM. WORDSWORTH,[158]

[157] _Memoirs_, ii. 347-8.

[158] _Ibid._ ii. 349.


103. _Of Bentley and Akenside_.

LETTER TO THE REV. ALEXANDER DYCE.

                   Dec. 23. 1837.

MY DEAR SIR,

I have just received your valuable present of Bentley's works, for
which accept my cordial thanks, as also for the leaf to be added to
Akenside.

Is it recorded in your Memoir of Akenside,--for I have not leisure nor
eyesight at present to look,--that he was fond of sitting in St. James's
Park with his eyes upon Westminster Abbey? This, I am sure, I have
either read or heard of him; and I imagine that it was from Mr. Rogers.
I am not unfrequently a visitor on Hampstead Heath, and seldom pass by
the entrance of Mr. Dyson's villa on Goulder's Hill, close by, without
thinking of the pleasure which Akenside often had there.

I cannot call to mind a reason why you should not think some passages in
'The Power of Sound' equal to anything I have produced. When first
printed in the 'Yarrow Revisited,' I placed it at the end of the volume,
and, in the last edition of my Poems, at the close of the Poems of
Imagination, indicating thereby my _own_ opinion of it.

How much do I regret that I have neither learning nor eyesight
thoroughly to enjoy Bentley's masterly 'Dissertation upon the Epistles
of Phalaris'! Many years ago I read the work with infinite pleasure. As
far as I know, or rather am able to judge, it is without a rival in that
department of literature; a work of which the English nation may be
proud as long as acute intellect, and vigorous powers, and profound
scholarship shall be esteemed in the world.

Let me again repeat my regret that in passing to and from Scotland you
have never found it convenient to visit this part of the country. I
should be delighted to see you, and I am sure Mr. Southey would be the
same: and in his house you would find an inexhaustible collection of
books, many curious no doubt; but his classical library is much the
least valuable part of it. The death of his excellent wife was a
deliverance for herself and the whole family, so great had been her
sufferings of mind and body.

You do not say a word about Skelton; and I regret much your
disappointment in respect of Middleton.

                   I remain, my dear Sir,
                       Faithfully, your much obliged,
                          WM. WORDSWORTH.[159]

[159] _Memoirs_, ii. 350-1.


104. _Presidency of Royal Dublin Society: Patronage of Genius: Canons of
Criticism: Family News_.

LETTER TO SIR WILLIAM R. HAMILTON.

                   Rydal Mount, Dec. 21 [1837].

MY DEAR SIR WILLIAM,

The papers had informed me of the honour conferred upon you, and I was
intending to congratulate you on the occasion, when your letter arrived.
The electors have done great credit to themselves by appointing you, and
not a little by rejecting the ultra-liberal Archbishop, and that by so
decided a majority. We are much pleased that your sister, who we
conclude is well, has sent her Poems to press, and wish they may obtain
the attention we are sure they will merit. Your own two Sonnets, for
which I thank you, we read, that is Mrs. W. and myself (Dora is in the
South), with interest. But to the main purport of your letter. You pay
me an undeserved compliment in requesting my opinion, how you could best
promote some of the benefits which the Society, at whose head you are
placed, aims at. As to patronage, you are right in supposing that I hold
it in little esteem for helping genius forward in the fine arts,
especially those whose medium is words. Sculpture and painting _may_ be
helped by it; but even in those departments there is much to be dreaded.
The French have established an Academy at Rome upon an extensive scale;
and so far from doing good, I was told by every one that it had done
much harm. The plan is this: they select the most distinguished students
from the school or academy at Paris and send them to Rome, with handsome
stipends, by which they are tempted into idleness, and of course into
vice. So that it looks like a contrivance for preventing the French
nation and the world at large profiting by the genius which nature may
have bestowed, and which left to itself would in some cases, perhaps,
have prospered. The principal, I was indeed told the only, condition
imposed upon these students is, that each of them send annually some
work of his hands to Paris. When at Rome, I saw a good deal of English
artists. They seemed to be living happily and doing well, tho', as you
are aware, the public patronage any of them receive is trifling.

Genius in poetry, or any department of what is called the Belles
Lettres, is much more likely to be cramped than fostered by public
support: better wait to reward those who have done their work, tho' even
here national rewards are not necessary, unless the labourers be, if not
in poverty, at least in narrow circumstances. Let the laws be but just
to them and they will be sure of attaining competence, if they have not
misjudged their own talents or misapplied them.

The cases of Chatterton, Burns, and others, might, it should seem, be
urged against the conclusion that help beforehand is not required; but I
do think that in the temperament of the two I have mentioned there was
something which, however favourable had been their circumstances,
however much they had been encouraged and supported, would have brought
on their ruin. As to what Patronage can do in Science, discoveries in
Physics, mechanic arts, &c., you know far better than I can pretend to
do.

As to 'better canons of criticism and general improvement of scholars,'
I really, speaking without affectation, am so little of a Critic or
Scholar, that it would be presumptuous in me to _write_ upon the subject
to you. If we were together and you should honour me by asking my
opinion upon particular points, that would be a very different thing,
and I might have something to say not wholly without value. But where
could I begin with so comprehensive an argument, and how could I put
into the compass of a letter my thoughts, such as they may be, with
anything like order? It is somewhat mortifying to me to disappoint you.
You must upon reflection I trust perceive, that in attempting to comply
with your wish I should only lose myself in a wilderness. I have been
applied to to give lectures upon Poetry in a public institution in
London, but I was conscious that I was neither competent to the office,
nor the public prepared to receive what I should have felt it my duty to
say, however [inadequately?].

I have [had] a very pleasant and not profitless tour on the Continent,
tho' with one great drawback, the being obliged on account of the
cholera to return without seeing Naples and its neighbourhood. Had it
not been for the state of my eyes, which became inflamed after I got
back to England, I should have been able to take Liverpool in my way
home, at the time you were there. The attack continued for a long time,
and has left a weakness in the organ which does not yet allow me either
to read or write; but with care I hope to come about.

My sister continues in the same enfeebled state of mind and body. Mrs.
W. is well; but your godson, we hear, is suffering from derangement of
the stomach, so that at present he is not a thriving child, but his
elder brother is now remarkably so, and he about the same age was
subject to the same trials. We trust that your little family are all
flourishing, and with our united affectionate regards believe me,
faithfully,

                   Dear Sir W., yours,
                       WM. WORDSWORTH.

I am sorry that I cannot send this thro' Lord Northampton, because he
tells me he is coming northward.[160]

[160] Here first printed. G.


105. _Prose-writing: Coleridge: Royal Dublin Society: Select Minds:
Copyright: Private Affairs_.

LETTER TO SIR WILLIAM R. HAMILTON.

                   Rydal Mount, Jan. 4. 1838.

MY DEAR SIR WILLIAM,

From a hope of something starting up in my mind which might prevent my
letter being an utter disappointment, I have not answered yours, as I
wished to do, by return of post. But I am really still as much at a loss
how to make my letter worth reading as if I had replied immediately.
Allow me, however, to thank you for your last, which has completely done
away with the vagueness of the former; I now distinctly understand you,
and as to one of your leading points, viz. availing myself of
publication through your Society, I may say that if there had been among
my papers anything of the kind you wish for, I should have gladly
forwarded it to you. But it is not so, nor dare I undertake to promise
anything of the kind for the future. Though prevailed upon by Mr.
Coleridge to write the first Preface to my Poems, which tempted, or
rather forced, me to add a supplement to it, and induced by my
friendship for him to write the Essay upon Epitaphs now appended to 'The
Excursion,' but first composed for 'The Friend,' I have never felt
inclined to write criticism, though I have talked, and am daily talking,
a great deal. If I were several years younger, out of friendship to you
mainly, I would sit down to the task of giving a body to my notions
upon the essentials of Poetry; a subject which could not be properly
treated, without adverting to the other branches of fine art. But at
present, with so much before me that I could wish to do in verse, and
the melancholy fact brought daily more and more home to my conviction,
that intellectual labour, by its action on the brain and nervous system,
is injurious to the bodily powers, and especially to my eyesight, I
should only be deceiving myself and misleading you, were I to encourage
a hope that, much as I could wish to be your fellow-labourer, however
humbly, I shall ever become so.

Having disposed of this rather painful part of the subject of your
letter, let me say, that though it is principally matters of science in
which publication through your Society would be serviceable, and indeed
in that department eminently so, I concur with you in thinking, that the
same vehicle would be useful for bringing under the notice of the
thinking part of the community critical essays of too abstract a
character to be fit for popularity. There are obviously, even in
criticism, two ways of affecting the minds of men--the one by treating
the matter so as to carry it immediately to the sympathies of the many;
and the other, by aiming at a few select and superior minds, that might
each become a centre for illustrating it in a popular way. Mr.
Coleridge, whom you allude to, acted upon the world to a great extent
thro' the latter of these processes; and there cannot be a doubt that
your Society might serve the cause of just thinking and pure taste
should you, as president of it, hold up to view the desirableness of
first conveying to a few, thro' that channel, reflections upon
literature and art, which, if well meditated, would be sure of winning
their way directly, or in their indirect results to a gradually widening
circle.

May I not encourage a hope that during the ensuing summer, or at the
worst at no distant period, you and I might meet, when a few hours'
conversation would effect more than could come out of a dozen letters
dictated, and hastily, as I am obliged to dictate this, from an
unexpected interruption when Mrs. W. and I were sitting down with the
pen in her hand?

You are right in your recollection that I named to you the subject of
foreign piracy, as injurious to English authors; and I may add now that
if it could be put a stop to, I believe that it would rarely happen that
successful writers, on works of imagination and feeling at least, would
stand in need of pensions from Government, or would feel themselves
justified in accepting them. Upon this subject I have spoken a great
deal to M.P.'s of all parties, and with several distinguished Americans.
I have also been in correspondence with the present Chancellor of the
Exchequer upon it, and dwelt upon the same topic in a letter which I had
occasion to write to Sir Robert Peel. Mr. Lytton Bulwer, as perhaps you
know, drew the attention of Parliament to it during the late Session.
Lord Palmerston said in answer to him, that the attention of Government
had already been directed to the measure, and that it would not be lost
sight of, or something to that purpose. I may claim some credit for my
exertions in this business, and full as much, or more, for the pains
which I have taken for many years, to interest men in the H[ouse] of
C[ommons] in the extension of the term of copyright--a measure which I
trust is about to be brought to a successful close by the exertions of
my admirable friend Serjeant Talfourd. To him I have written upon the
argument more than once. When this is effected, I trust the other part
of the subject will be taken up with spirit, and if the Foreign
Secretary, in whose department the matter lies, should be remiss, I
trust he will be stimulated thro' Parliament, to which desirable end the
services of distinguished societies like yours, and the notice of the
question, by men of letters, in reviews or otherwise, would greatly
contribute. Good authors, if justice were done to them by their own and
foreign countries, now that reading is spread and spreading so widely,
would very few of them be in need, except thro' their own fault.

When I was in town last August, the American minister, Mr. Stephenson,
spoke to me with much indignation of the law and practice by which
copyright was secured in England for American authors, while there was
no reciprocity for English writers in America.

But I must conclude, or I shall miss the post. The father of your godson
is here, and begs to be remembered to you.

Did I ever mention to you that owing to the sea having swallowed up his
father-in-law's coal-pits, ... income is much reduced; and he therefore
feels it necessary to endeavour to procure a couple of pupils, who could
afford to pay rather handsomely for the advantages they would have under
his roof? By this time he would have succeeded, but parents in the
South have an unaccountable objection to sending their sons so far
North. As the same might not be felt in Ireland, I take the liberty of
mentioning his wish to you, being persuaded that if you can you will
assist him in his views. If your address to your Society should be
published, could you send it me, and acquaint me with what you have
done?

                   Affectionately yours,
                           WM. WORDSWORTH.[161]

[161] Here first printed. G.

