

106. _Of his own Poems and posthumous Fame_.

LETTER TO HENRY REED, ESQ., PHILADELPHIA.

                   Rydal Mount, Dec. 23. 1839.

MY DEAR SIR,

The year is upon the point of expiring; and a letter of yours, dated May
7th, though not received till late in June (for I was moving about all
last spring and part of the summer), remains unacknowledged. I have also
to thank you for the acceptable present of the two volumes which reached
me some time afterwards.

       *       *       *       *       *

Your letters are naturally turned upon the impression which my poems
have made, and the estimation they are held, or likely to be held in,
through the vast country to which you belong. I wish I could feel as
lively as you do upon this subject, or even upon the general destiny of
those works. Pray do not be long surprised at this declaration. There is
a difference of more than the length of your life, I believe, between
our ages. I am standing on the brink of that vast ocean I must sail so
soon; I must speedily lose sight of the shore; and I could not once have
conceived how little I now am troubled by the thought of how long or
short a time they who remain on that shore may have sight of me. The
other day I chanced to be looking over a MS. poem, belonging to the year
1803, though not actually composed till many years afterwards. It was
suggested by visiting the neighbourhood of Dumfries, in which Burns had
resided, and where he died; it concluded thus:

    'Sweet Mercy to the gales of heaven
    This minstrel led, his sins forgiven;

    The rueful conflict, the heart riven
      With vain endeavour,
    And memory of earth's bitter leaven
      Effaced for ever.'

Here the verses closed; but I instantly added, the other day,

    'But why to him confine the prayer,
    When kindred thoughts and yearnings bear
    On the frail heart the purest share
        With all that live?
    The best of what we do and are.
        Just God, forgive!'

The more I reflect upon this last exclamation, the more I feel (and
perhaps it may in some degree be the same with you) justified in
attaching comparatively small importance to any literary monument that I
may be enabled to leave behind. It is well, however, I am convinced,
that men think otherwise in the earlier part of their lives; and why it
is so, is a point I need not touch upon in writing to you.

Before I dismiss this subject let me thank you for the extract from your
intelligent friend's letter; and allow me to tell you that I could not
but smile at your Boston critic placing my name by the side of Cowley. I
suppose he cannot mean anything more than that the same measure of
reputation or fame (if that be not too presumptuous a word) is due to us
both.

German transcendentalism, which you say this critic is infected by,
would be a woeful visitation for the world.

The way in which you speak of me in connection with your possible visit
to England was most gratifying; and I here repeat that I should be truly
glad to see you in the delightful spot where I have long dwelt; and I
have the more pleasure in saying this to you, because, in spite of my
old infirmity, my strength exceeds that of most men of my years, and my
general health continues to be, as it always has been, remarkably good.
A page of blank paper stares me in the face; and I am not sure that it
is worth while to fill it with a sonnet which broke from me not long ago
in reading an account of misdoings in many parts of your Republic. Mrs.
Wordsworth will, however, transcribe it.

    'Men of the Western World! in Fate's dark book,
    Whence these opprobrious leaves, of dire portent?'

To turn to another subject. You will be sorry to learn that several of
my most valued friends are likely to suffer from the monetary
derangements in America. My family, however, is no way directly
entangled, unless the Mississippi bonds prove invalid. There is an
opinion pretty current among discerning persons in England, that
Republics are not to be trusted in money concerns,--I suppose because
the sense of honour is more obtuse, the responsibility being divided
among so many. For my own part, I have as little or less faith in
absolute despotisms, except that they are more easily convinced that it
is politic to keep up their credit by holding to their engagements. What
power is maintained by this practice was shown by Great Britain in her
struggle with Buonaparte. This lesson has not been lost on the leading
monarchical states of Europe. But too much of this.

                   Believe me to remain,
                       Faithfully yours,
                           Wm. Wordsworth.[162]


107. _the Sheldonian Theatre_.

LETTER TO JOHN PEACE, ESQ., CITY LIBRARY, BRISTOL.

                   Rydal Mount, Aug. 30. 1839.

MY DEAR SIR,

It was not a little provoking that I had not the pleasure of shaking you
by the hand at Oxford when you did me the honour of coming so far to
'join in the shout.' I was told by a Fellow of University College that
he had never witnessed such an outburst of enthusiasm in that place,
except upon the occasions of the visits of the Duke of Wellington--one
unexpected. My Nephew, Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge, was
present, as well as my son, William, who, I am happy to say, is much
better in health than when you saw him in Oxford. He is here, and
desires to be kindly remembered to you. [163]

[162] _Memoirs_, ii. 351-4.

[163] Extract: _Memoirs_, ii. 357-8.


108. _New Edition of his Poems_.

LETTER TO EDWARD MOXON, ESQ.

                   Rydal Mount, Dec. 11. 1838.

DEAR MR. MOXON,

I am in hopes that my nephew, Mr. John Wordsworth, of Cambridge, will
correct the proofs for me: he promised to do so, when he was here a few
weeks ago; but I grieve to say he has been very unwell since, and may
not be equal to the task; but I shall write to him on the subject. He is
the most accurate man I know; and if a revise of each sheet could be
sent to him the edition would be immaculate.

                         W. Wordsworth.[164]


109. _Death of his Nephew, John Wordsworth_.

LETTER TO LADY FREDERICK BENTINCK.

                   Rydal Mount, Ambleside (not Kendal), Jan. 3 [1840].

MY DEAR LADY FREDERICK,

Yesterday brought us melancholy news in a letter from my brother, Dr.
Wordsworth, which announced the death of his eldest son. He died last
Tuesday, in Trinity College, of which he was a fellow, having been
tenderly nursed by his father during rather a long illness. He was a
most amiable man, and I have reason to believe was one of the best
scholars in Europe. We were all strongly attached to him, and, as his
poor father writes, the loss is to him, and to his sorrowing sons,
irreparable on this side of the grave.

                                      W. W.[165]

[164] _Memoirs_, ii. 358.

[165] _Ibid._ ii. 360.


110. _Of the Same_.

LETTER TO THE REV. THE MASTER OF TRINITY COLLEGE. CAMBRIDGE.

                   Friday, Jan. 3 [1840].

MY VERY DEAR BROTHER,

It is in times of trouble and affliction that one feels most deeply the
strength of the ties of family and nature. We all most affectionately
condole with you, and those who are around you, at this melancholy time.
The departed was beloved in this house as he deserved to be; but our
sorrow, great as it is for our own sakes, is still heavier for yours and
his brothers'. He is a power gone out of our family, and they will be
perpetually reminded of it. But the best of all consolations will be
with you, with them, with us, and all his numerous relatives and
friends, especially with Mrs. Hoare, that his life had been as blameless
as man's could well be, and through the goodness of God, he is gone to
his reward.

                   I remain your loving brother,
                         Wm. Wordsworth.[166]


111. _On the Death of a young Person_.[167]

                   Rydal Mount, Ambleside, May 21. 1840.

MY DEAR SIR,

Pray impute to anything but a want of due sympathy with you in your
affliction my not having earlier given an answer to your letter. In
truth, I was so much moved by it, that I had not, at first, sufficient
resolution to bring my thoughts so very close to your trouble, as must
have been done had I taken up the pen immediately. I have been myself
distressed in the same way, though my two children were taken from me at
an earlier age, one in her fifth, the other in his seventh year, and
within half a year of each other. I can, therefore, enter into your
sorrows more feelingly than for others is possible, who have not
suffered like losses.

Your departed daughter struck me as having one of the most intelligent
and impressive countenances I ever looked upon, and I spoke of her as
such to Mrs. Wordsworth, Miss Fenwick, and to others. The indications
which I saw in her of a somewhat alarming state of health, I could not
but mention to you, when you accompanied me a little way from your own
door. You spoke something encouraging; but they continued to haunt me;
so that your kind letter was something less of a shock than it would
otherwise have been, though not less of a sorrow.

[166] _Memoirs_, ii. 360-1.

[167] Ellen Parry (daughter of Dr. Parry), who died April 28, 1840.
Wordsworth saw her April 28, 1839. He was again at Summer Hill, Bath, in
April 1840.

How pathetic is your account of the piety with which the dear creature
supported herself under those severe trials of mind and body with which
it pleased God to prepare her for a happier world! The consolation which
_children_ and very young persons, who have been religiously brought up,
draw from the Holy Scriptures, ought to be habitually on the minds of
_adults_ of all ages, for the benefit of their own souls, and requires
to be treated in a loftier and more comprehensive train of thought and
feeling than by writers has been usually bestowed upon it. It does not,
therefore, surprise me that you hinted at my own pen being employed upon
the subject, as brought before the mind in your lamented daughter's own
most touching case. I wish I were equal to anything so holy, but I feel
that I am not. It is remarkable, however, that within the last few days
the subject has been presented to my mind by two several persons, both
unknown to me; which is something of a proof how widely its importance
is felt, and also that there is a feeling that I am not wholly unworthy
of treating it.

Your letter, my dear Sir, I value exceedingly, and shall take the
liberty, as I have done more than once, with fit reverence, of reading
it in quarters where it is likely to do good, or rather, where I know it
must do good.

Wishing and praying that the Almighty may bestow upon yourself, the
partner in your bereavement, and all the fellow-sufferers in your
household, that consolation and support which can proceed only from His
grace,

                   I remain, my dear Dr. Parry,
                         Most faithfully, your much obliged,
                                 W. Wordsworth.[168]


112. _Religion and Versified Religion_.

LETTER TO THE REV. H. (AFTERWARDS DEAN) ALFORD.

                   (Postmark) Ambleside, Feb. 21. 1848.

MY DEAR SIR,

Pray excuse my having been some little time in your debt. I could plead
many things in extenuation, the chief, that old one of the state of my
eyes, which never leaves me at liberty either to read or write a tenth
part as much as I could wish, and as otherwise I ought to do.

[168] _Memoirs_, ii. 362-3.

It cannot but be highly gratifying to me to learn that my writings are
prized so highly by a poet and critic of your powers. The essay upon
them which you have so kindly sent me seems well qualified to promote
your views in writing it. I was particularly pleased with your
distinction between religion in poetry, and versified religion. For my
own part, I have been averse to frequent mention of the mysteries of
Christian faith; not from a want of a due sense of their momentous
nature, but the contrary. I felt it far too deeply to venture on
handling the subject as familiarly as many scruple not to do. I am far
from blaming them, but let them not blame me, nor turn from my
companionship on that account. Besides general reasons for diffidence in
treating subjects of Holy Writ, I have some especial ones. I might err
in points of faith, and I should not deem my mistakes less to be
deprecated because they were expressed in metre. Even Milton, in my
humble judgment, has erred, and grievously; and what poet could hope to
atone for his apprehensions[169] in the way in which that mighty mind
has done?

I am not at all desirous that any one should write an elaborate critique
on my poetry.[170] There is no call for it. If they be from above, they
will do their own work in course of time; if not, they will perish as
they ought. But scarcely a week passes in which I do not receive
grateful acknowledgments of the good they have done to the minds of the
several writers. They speak of the relief they have received from them
under affliction and in grief, and of the calmness and elevation of
spirit which the poems either give or assist them in attaining. As these
benefits are not without a traceable bearing upon the good of the
immortal soul, the sooner, perhaps, they are pointed out and illustrated
in a work like yours, the better.

[169] Sic: qu. 'Misapprehensions.' _H.A._

[170] Sic: 1. 'Poems.' _II. A_.

Pray excuse my talking so much about myself: your letter and critique
called me to the subject. But I assure you it would have been more
grateful to me to acknowledge the debt we owe you in this house, where
we have read your poems with no common pleasure. Your 'Abbot of
Muchelnage' also makes me curious to hear more of him.

But I must conclude,

I was truly sorry to have missed you when you and Mrs. Alford called at
Rydal. Mrs. W. unites with me in kind regards to you both; and believe
me,

                   My dear Sir,
                           Faithfully yours,
                             Wm. Wordsworth.[171]


113. _Memorandum of a Conversation on Sacred Poetry (by Rev. R. P.
Graves)_.

I must try to give you a summary of a long conversation I had with
Wordsworth on the subject of _sacred poetry,_ and which I wish I were
able to report in full. In the course of it he expressed to me the
feelings of reverence which prevented him from venturing to lay his hand
on what he always thought a subject too high for him; and he accompanied
this with the earnest protest that his works, as well as those of any
other poet, should not be considered as developing all the influences
which his own heart recognised, but rather those which he considered
himself able as an artist to display to advantage, and which he thought
most applicable to the wants, and admitted by the usages, of the world
at large. This was followed by a most interesting discussion upon
Milton, Cowper, the general progress of religion as an element of
poetry, and the gradual steps by which it must advance to a power
comprehensive and universally admitted; steps which are defined in their
order by the constitution of the human mind, and which must proceed with
vastly more slowness in the case of the progress made by collective
minds, than it does in an individual soul.[172]


114. _Visit of Queen Adelaide to Rydal Mount_.

LETTER TO LADY FREDERICK BENTINCK.

                   July 1840.

I hope, dear Lady Frederick, that nothing will prevent my appearance at
Lowther towards the end of next week. But I have for these last few
years been visited always with a serious inflammation in my eyes about
this season of the year, which causes me to have fears about the
fulfilment of any engagement, however agreeable. Pray thank Lord
Lonsdale, on my part, for his thinking of me upon this occasion.

[171] _Memoirs_, ii. 364-6.

[172] _Ibid._ ii. 366.

On Monday morning, a little before nine, a beautiful and bright day,
the Queen Dowager and her sister appeared at Rydal. I met them at the
lower waterfall, with which her Majesty seemed much pleased. Upon
hearing that it was not more than half a mile to the higher fall, she
said, briskly, she would go; though Lord Denbigh and Lord Howe felt that
they were pressed for time, having to go upon Keswick Lake, and thence
to Paterdale. I walked by the Queen's side up to the higher waterfall,
and she seemed to be struck much with the beauty of the scenery. Her
step was exceedingly light; but I learned that her health is not good,
or rather that she still suffers from the state of her constitution,
which caused her to go abroad.

Upon quitting the park of Rydal, nearly opposite our own gate, the Queen
was saluted with a pretty rural spectacle; nearly fifty children, drawn
up in avenue, with bright garlands in their hands, three large flags
flying, and a band of music. They had come from Ambleside, and the
garlands were such as are annually prepared at this season for a
ceremony called 'the Rush-bearing;' and the parish-clerk of Ambleside
hit upon this way of showing at Rydal the same respect to the Queen
which had been previously shown at Ambleside. I led the Queen to the
principal points of view in our little domain, particularly to that,
through the summer house, which shows the lake of Rydal to such
advantage. The Queen talked more than once about having a cottage among
the lakes, which of course was nothing more than a natural way of giving
vent to the pleasure which she had in the country. You will think, I
fear, that I have dwelt already too long upon the subject; and I shall
therefore only add, that all went off satisfactorily, and that every one
was delighted with her Majesty's demeanour. Lord and Lady Sheffield were
the only persons of her suite whom I had seen before. Lord Howe was
pleased with the sight of the pictures from his friend Sir George
Beaumont's pencil, and showed them to the Queen, who, having sat some
little time in the house, took her leave, cordially shaking Mrs.
Wordsworth by the hand, as a friend of her own rank might have done. She
had also inquired for Dora, who was introduced to her. I hope she will
come again into the country, and visit Lowther.

Pray excuse the above long story, which I should not have ventured upon,
but that you expressed a wish upon the subject.

What enchanting weather! I hope, and do not doubt, that you all enjoy
it, my dear Lady Frederick, as we are doing.

I ought not to forget, that two days ago I went over to see Mr. Southey,
or rather Mrs. Southey, for he is past taking pleasure in the presence
of any of his friends. He did not recognise me till he was told. Then
his eyes flashed for a moment with their former brightness, but he sank
into the state in which I had found him, patting with both hands his
books affectionately, like a child. Having attempted in vain to interest
him by a few observations, I took my leave, after five minutes or so. It
was, for me, a mournful visit, and for his poor wife also. His health is
good, and he may live many years; though the body is much enfeebled.

                   Ever affectionately yours,
                          Wm. Wordsworth.

We hope your lameness will soon leave you, that you may ramble about as
usual.[173]


115. _Ecclesiastical Duties and Revenues Act, &c._

LETTER TO THE REV. T. BOYLES MURRAY.

                   Rydal Mount, Ambleside, Sept. 24. 1840.

DEAR SIR,

Upon returning home after an absence of ten days, I have the pleasure of
finding your obliging letter, and the number of the _Ecclesiastical
Gazette_ containing the 'Ecclesiastical Duties and Revenues Act:' for
both marks of attention I beg you to accept my sincere thanks. As soon
as I can find leisure, I will carefully peruse the Act; at present I can
only say that I look upon changes so extensive and searching with a
degree of alarm proportionate to my love and affection for the
Establishment with which they are connected.

As you have put me in possession of the _Gazette_, I can scarcely feel
justified in looking to the fulfilment of your promise to send me the
Act, separately printed. Indeed, I feel that it would be giving yourself
more trouble than there is occasion for.

[173] _Memoirs_, ii. 367-9.

It pleases me much to learn that Mrs. Murray and you enjoyed your
ramble among the lakes.

                   Believe me to be, dear Sir, faithfully,
                         Your obliged servant,
                                  Wm. Wordsworth.[174]


116. _Samuel Rogers and Wordsworth together_.

LETTER TO LADY FREDERICK BENTINCK.

                   Rydal Mount, Sept. 26. 1840.

DEAR LADY FREDERICK,

Mr. Rogers and I had a pleasant journey to Rydal the day we left all our
kind friends at Lowther. We alighted at Lyulph's Tower, and saw the
waterfall in great power after the night's rain, the sun shining full
into the chasm, and making a splendid rainbow of the spray. Afterwards,
walking through Mr. Askew's grounds, we saw the lake to the greatest
possible advantage. Mr. R. left on Thursday, the morning most beautiful,
though it rained afterwards. I know not how he could tear himself away
from this lovely country at this charming season. I say charming,
notwithstanding this is a dull day; but yesterday was most glorious. I
hope our excellent friend does not mean to remain in London.

We have had no visits from strangers since my return, so that the press
of the season seems to be over. The leaves are not changed here so much
as at Lowther, and of course not yet so beautiful, nor are they ever
quite so as with you, your trees being so much finer, and your woods so
very much more extensive. We have a great deal of coppice, which makes
but a poor show in autumn compared with timber trees.

Your son George knows what he has to expect in the few sheets which I
enclose for him.

With many thanks for the endless kind attentions which I received from
you, and others under your father's hospitable roof, and with my
grateful respects to him, and a thousand good wishes for all, I remain,
my wife and daughter joining in these feelings, My dear Lady Frederick,
affectionately yours,

                                      Wm. Wordsworth.[175]

[174] _Memoirs_, ii. 369-70.

[175] _Ibid._ ii. 370-1.

117. _An alarming Accident, Nov_. 11, 1840.

LETTER TO LADY FREDERICK BENTINCK.

                   Rydal Mount, Monday Evening.

The accident after which you inquire, dear Lady Frederick, with so much
feeling, might have been fatal, but through God's mercy we escaped
without bodily injury, as far as I know, worth naming. These were the
particulars: About three miles beyond Keswick, on the Ambleside road, is
a small bridge, from the top of which we got sight of the mail coach
coming towards us, at about forty yards' distance, just before the road
begins to descend a narrow, steep, and winding slope. Nothing was left
for J----, who drove the gig in which we were, but to cross the bridge,
and, as the road narrowed up the slope that was in our front, to draw up
as close to the wall on our left (our side of the road) as possible.
This he did, both of us hoping that the coachman would slacken his pace
down the hill, and pass us as far from our wheel as the road would
allow. But he did neither. On the contrary, he drove furiously down the
hill; and though, as we afterwards ascertained, by the track of his
wheels, he had a yard width of road to spare, he made no use of it. In
consequence of this recklessness and his want of skill, the wheel of his
coach struck our wheel most violently, drove back our horse and gig some
yards, and then sent us all together through a small gap in the wall,
with the stones of the wall tumbling about us, into a plantation that
lay a yard perpendicular below the level of the road from which the
horse and gig, with us in it, had been driven. The shafts were broken
off close to the carriage, and we were partly thrown and partly leaped
out. After breaking the traces, the horse leaped back into the road and
galloped off, the shafts and traces sticking to him; nor did the poor
creature stop till he reached the turnpike at Grasmere, seven miles from
the spot where the mischief was done. We sent by the coach for a chaise
to take us to Rydal, and hired a cart to take the broken gig to be
mended at Keswick.

The mercy was, that the violent shock from the coach did not tear off
our wheel; for if this had been done, J----, and probably I also, must
have fallen under the hind wheels of the coach, and in all likelihood
been killed. We have since learned that the coachman had only just come
upon the road, which is in a great many places very dangerous, and that
he was wholly unpractised in driving four-in-hand. Pray excuse this long
and minute account. I should have written to you next day, but I waited,
hoping to be able to add that my indisposition was gone, as I now trust
it is.

With respectful remembrances to Lord Lonsdale, and kindest regards to
yourself and Miss Thompson, I remain,

                   Dear Lady Frederick,
                     Affectionately yours,
                       Wm. Wordsworth.[176]

[176] _Memoirs_, ii. 371-3.


118. _Of Alston and Haydon, &c._


LETTER TO HENRY REED, ESQ., PHILADELPHIA.

                   Rydal Mount, Jan. 13. 1841.
MY DEAR MR. REED,

It is gratifying to learn that through your means Mr. Alston has been
reminded of me. We became acquainted many years ago through our common
friend Mr. Coleridge, who had seen much of Mr. Alston when they were
both living at Rome.

       *       *       *       *       *

You mention the Sonnet I wrote upon Haydon's picture of the Duke of
Wellington. I have known Haydon, and Wilkie also, from their
contemporaneous introduction to the world as artists; their powers were
perceived and acknowledged by my lamented friend Sir George Beaumont,
and patronised by him accordingly; and it was at his house where I first
became acquainted with them both. Haydon is bent upon coming to Rydal
next summer, with a view to paint a likeness of me, not as a mere
matter-of-fact portrait, but one of a poetical character, in which he
will endeavour to place his friend in some favourite scene of these
mountains. I am rather afraid, I own, of any attempt of this kind,
notwithstanding my high opinion of his ability; but if he keeps in his
present mind, which I doubt, it will be in vain to oppose his
inclination. He is a great enthusiast, possessed also of a most active
intellect, but he wants that submissive and steady good sense which is
absolutely necessary for the adequate development of power in that art
to which he is attached.

As I am on the subject of painting, it may be worth while to add, that
Pickersgill came down last summer to paint a portrait of me for Sir
Robert Peel's gallery at Drayton Manor. It was generally thought here
that this work was more successful than the one he painted some years
ago for St. John's College, at the request of the Master and
Fellows.[177]

[177] _Memoirs_, ii. 373-4.


119. _Of Peace's 'Apology for Cathedrals.'_

I have no especial reason for writing at this moment of time, but I have
long wished to thank you for the 'Apology for Cathedrals,' which I have
learned is from your pen. The little work does you great credit; it is
full of that wisdom which the heart and imagination alone could
adequately supply for such a subject; and is, moreover, very pleasingly
diversified by styles of treatment all good in their kind. I need add no
more than that I entirely concur in the views you take: but what avails
it? the mischief is done, and they who have been most prominent in
setting it on foot will have to repent of their narrow comprehension;
which, however, is no satisfaction to us, who from the first foresaw the
evil tendency of the measure.[178]

[178] Extract of letter to John Peace, Esq., Jan. 19, 1841: _Memoirs_,
ii. 376.

120. _Of 'The Task' of Cowper and Shenstone_.

Though I can make but little use of my eyes in writing or reading, I
have lately been reading Cowper's 'Task' aloud; and in so doing was
tempted to look over the parallelisms, for which Mr. Southey was in his
edition indebted to you. Knowing how comprehensive your acquaintance
with poetry is, I was rather surprised that you did not notice the
identity of the thought, and accompanying illustrations of it, in a
passage of Shenstone's Ode upon Rural Elegance, compared with one in
'The Task,' where Cowper speaks of the inextinguishable love of the
country as manifested by the inhabitants of cities in their culture of
plants and flowers, where the want of air, cleanliness, and light, is
so unfavourable to their growth and beauty. The germ of the main thought
is to be found in Horace,

    'Nempe inter varias nutritur sylva columnas,
    Laudaturque domus longos quae prospicit agros;
    Naturam expellas furcâ, tamen usque recurret.'

Lib. i. Epist. x. v. 22.

Pray write to me soon. Ever, my dear friend,

                Faithfully your obliged,
                   WM. WORDSWORTH.[179]


121. _On a Tour_.

LETTER TO JOHN PEACE, ESQ.

                   12 North Parade, Bath, April 19. 1841.

MY DEAR MR. PEACE,

Here I am and have been since last Wednesday evening. I came down the
Wye, and passed through Bristol, but arriving there at the moment the
railway train was about to set off, and being in the company of four
ladies (Miss Fenwick, and Mrs. Wordsworth, and my daughter and niece), I
had not a moment to spare, so could not call on you, my good friend,
which I truly regretted. Pray spare an hour or two to come here, and
then we can fix a day, when, along with my daughter, I can visit
Bristol, see you, Mr. Cottle, and Mr. Wade.

       *       *       *       *       *

                   All unite in kindest regards.
                       Ever yours,
                         WM. WORDSWORTH.[180]


122. _Marriage of Dora_.

TO THE SAME.

                   Bath, May 11. 1841.
MY DEAR MR. PEACE,

This morning my dear daughter was married in St. James's in this place.

Tomorrow we leave Bath for Wells, and thence to the old haunts of Mr.
Coleridge, and myself, and dear sister, about Alfoxden.

                   Adieu,
                          W. W.[181]

[179] Extract of letter to John Peace, Esq., January 19, 1841:
_Memoirs_, ii. 376.

[180] _Memoirs_, ii, 377.

[181] _Ibid._ ii. 378.


123. _Letters to his Brother_.

TO THE REV. DR. WORDSWORTH, MASTER OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.

MY DEAR BROTHER,

Your affectionate and generous kindness to your, I trust, deserving
niece has quite overpowered me and her mother, to whom I could not
forbear communicating the contents of your letter.

[The above relates to an act of kindness which the late Master of
Trinity had the happiness of performing, on the occasion of Dora
Wordsworth's marriage.

The following refers to a serious accident which occurred to him at
Cambridge, by a fall from his horse.]

                   Feb. 16. 1841.

MY DEAR BROTHER,

The good accounts which we receive from time to time of your progress
towards perfect recovery from your late severe accident embolden me to
congratulate you in my own name, and the whole of my family.

       *       *       *       *       *

It remains now for us to join heartily, as we all do, in expressing a
wish that, being convalescent, you would not be tempted to over-exert
yourself. I need scarcely add, that we all unite with you and your sons,
with Susan, and your other relations, and all your friends, in fervent
thanks to Almighty God for His goodness in preserving you.

As a brother I feel deeply; and regarding your life as most valuable to
the community, I the more rejoice in the prospect of your life being
prolonged.

                   Believe me, my dear Brother,
                       Most affectionately yours,
                           WM. WORDSWORTH.[182]

[182] _Memoirs_, ii. 382-3.

124. _Episcopal Church of America: Emerson and Carlyle_.

TO PROFESSOR REED.

                   Rydal Mount, Ambleside, Aug. 16. 1841.

MY DEAR MR. REED,

I have lately had the pleasure of seeing, both in London and at my own
house, the Bishop of New Jersey. He is a man of no ordinary powers of
mind and attainments, of warm feelings and sincere piety. Indeed, I
never saw a person of your country, which is remarkable for cordiality,
whose manner was so thoroughly cordial. He had been greatly delighted
with his reception in England, and what he had seen of it both in Art
and Nature. By the by, I heard him preach an excellent sermon in London.
I believe this privilege is of modern date. The Bishop has furnished me
with his funeral sermon upon Bishop White, to assist me in fulfilling a
request which you first made to me, viz. that I would add a Sonnet to my
Ecclesiastical Series, upon the union of the two Episcopal churches of
England and America.[183] I will endeavour to do so, when I have more
leisure than at present, this being the season when our beautiful region
attracts many strangers, who take up much of my time.

Do you know Miss Peabody of Boston? She has just sent me, with the
highest eulogy, certain essays of Mr. Emerson. Our Mr. Carlyle and he
appear to be what the French used to call _esprits forts_, though the
French idols showed their spirit after a somewhat different fashion. Our
two present Philosophes, who have taken a language which they suppose to
be English for their vehicle, are verily 'par nobile fratrum,' and it is
a pity that the weakness of our age has not left them exclusively to
this appropriate reward--mutual admiration. Where is the thing which now
passes for philosophy at Boston to stop?

                   Ever faithfully yours,
                          WM.  WORDSWORTH.[184]

[183] Dr. Seabury was consecrated bishop (of Connecticut) by Scottish
bishops at Aberdeen, on 14th November 1784. Dr. White and Dr. Provoost
were consecrated bishops (of New York and Pennsylvania) at Lambeth, 4th
February 1787.

[184] _Memoirs_, ii. 383-4.

125. _Old Haunts revisited_.

LETTER TO JOHN PEACE, ESQ.

                   Rydal Mount, Sept. 4. 1841.

MY DEAR PEACE,

       *       *       *       *       *

Mrs. W. is quite well. We were three months and as many weeks absent
before we reached our own home again. We made a very agreeable tour in
Devonshire, going by Exeter to Plymouth, and returning along the coast
by Salisbury and Winchester to London. In London and its neighbourhood
we stayed not quite a month. During this tour we visited my old haunts
at and about Alfoxden and Nethertowey, and at Coleorton, where we stayed
several days. These were farewell visits for life, and of course not a
little interesting....

                   Ever faithfully yours,
                          W. WORDSWORTH.[185]


126. _No Pension sought_.

In the summer of 1842, Wordsworth resigned his office of Stamp
Distributor; not, however, on a retiring pension, as has been sometimes
asserted. In a letter, dated March 2, 1840, and addressed to Lord
Morpeth, he says, 'I never did seek or accept a pension from the present
or any other administration, directly or indirectly.' But the duties,
and also the emoluments, of the Distributorship were transferred to his
son William, who had for some time acted as his deputy at Carlisle.[186]


127. _The Master of Trinity_.

LETTER TO A NEPHEW.

                   Rydal, Nov. 5. 1841.

MY DEAR C----,

Your father left us yesterday, having been just a week under our roof.
The weather was favourable, and he seemed to enjoy himself much. His
muscular strength, as proved by the walks we took together, is great.
One day we were nearly four hours on foot, without resting, and he did
not appear in the least fatigued.

       *       *       *       *       *

[185] _Memoirs_, ii. 384-5.

[186] _Ibid._ ii. 387.

We all thought him looking well, and his mind appears as active as ever.
It was a great delight to us to see him here.

He was anxious to see Charles; he will reach Winchester this afternoon,
I hope without injury. Yours, &c.

W. W.[187]


128. _Of Alston's Portrait of Coleridge_.

Poor Mr. Wade! From his own modest merits, and his long connection with
Mr. Coleridge, and with my early Bristol remembrances, he was to me an
interesting person. His desire to have my address must have risen, I
think, from a wish to communicate with me upon the subject of Mr.
Alston's valuable portrait of Coleridge. Pray tell me what has, or is
likely to, become of it. I care comparatively little about the matter,
provided due care has been taken for its preservation, and in his native
country. It would be a sad pity if the late owner's intention of sending
it to America be fulfilled. It is the only likeness of the great
original that ever gave me the least pleasure; and it is, in fact, most
happily executed, as every one who has a distinct remembrance of what C.
was at that time must with delight acknowledge, and would be glad to
certify.[188]


129. _Of Southey's Death_.

The papers will have informed you, before you receive this, of poor dear
Southey's decease. He died yesterday morning about nine o'clock. Some
little time since, he was seized with typhus fever, but he passed away
without any outward signs of pain, as gently as possible. We are, of
course, not without sadness upon the occasion, notwithstanding there has
been, for years, cause why all who knew and loved him should wish for
his deliverance.[189]


130. _Tropical Scenery: Grace Darling: Southey, &c._

LETTER TO LIEUTENANT-GENERAL SIR WM. GOMM.[190]

[187] _Memoirs_, ii. 385.

[188] Extract of letter to John Peace, Esq., Dec. 12, 1842: _ibid._ ii.
390-1.

[189] Extract of letter to Nephew, March 22, 1843: _ibid._ ii. 391.

[190] The venerable and illustrious soldier has only very recently died.
Within ten days of his death he wrote the present Editor tenderly and
reverentially of Wordsworth. G.

                   Rydal Mount, March 24. 1843.

MY DEAR SIR WILLIAM,

Nothing should have prevented my answering your kind letter from the
Cape, long ago, but the want of matter that seemed worth sending so far,
unless I confined myself to what you must he well assured of, my sincere
esteem and regard for yourself and Lady Gomm, and the expression of good
wishes for your health and happiness. I am still in the same difficulty,
but cannot defer writing longer, lest I should appear to myself unworthy
of your friendship or respect.

You describe the beauties of Rio Janeiro in glowing colours, and your
animated picture was rendered still more agreeable to me by the sight,
which I had enjoyed a little before, of a panorama of the same scene,
executed by a friend of mine, who in his youth studied at the Academy
with a view to practise painting as a profession. He was a very
promising young artist, but having a brother a Brazilian merchant, he
changed his purpose and went to Rio, where he resided many years, and
made a little fortune, which enabled him to purchase and build in
Cumberland, where I saw his splendid portrait of that magnificent
region. What an intricacy of waters, and what boldness and fantastic
variety in the mountains! I suppose, taking the region as a whole, it is
scarcely anywhere surpassed.

If the different quarters of the globe should ever become subject to one
empire, Rio ought to be the metropolis, it is so favoured in every
respect, and so admirably placed for intercourse with all the countries
of the earth. Your approach to the Cape was under awful circumstances,
and, with three great wrecks strewn along the coast of the bay, Lady
Gomm's spirit and fortitude, as described by you, are worthy of all
admiration, and I am sure she will sympathise with the verses I send, to
commemorate a noble exploit of one of her sex. The inhumanity with which
the shipwrecked were lately treated upon the French coast impelled me to
place in contrast the conduct of an English woman and her parents under
like circumstances, as it occurred some years ago. Almost immediately
after I had composed my tribute to the memory of _Grace Darling_, I
learnt that the Queen and Queen Dowager had both just subscribed towards
the erection of a monument to record her heroism, upon the spot that
witnessed it.

Of public news I say nothing, as you will hear everything from quarters
more worthy of attention. I hope all goes on to your satisfaction,
mainly so at least, in your new government, and that the disposition
which you will have taken with you to benefit the people under your rule
has not been, nor is likely to be, frustrated in any vexatious or
painful degree.

Yesterday I went over to Keswick to attend the funeral of my excellent
friend, Mr. Southey. His genius and abilities are well known to the
world, and he was greatly valued for his generous disposition and moral
excellence. His illness was long and afflicting; his mind almost
extinguished years before the breath departed. Mr. Rogers I have not
been in communication with since I saw you in London, but be assured I
shall bear in memory your message, and deliver it, if he and I live to
meet again. And now, my dear Sir Wm., repeating the united best good
wishes of Mrs. W. and myself, for you and Lady Gomm, and for your safe
return to your own country, I remain, in the hope of hearing from you
again,

                   Most faithfully your much obliged,
                            W. WORDSWORTH.

My nephew is still in the Ionian Islands.[191]

[191] _Memoirs_, ii. 392-4.


131. _Contemporary Poets: Southey's Death: 'The Excursion,' &c._

TO PROFESSOR REED.

                   Rydal Mount, March 27. 1843.

MY DEAR MR. REED,

       *       *       *       *       *

You give me pleasure by the interest you take in the various passages in
which I speak of the poets, my contemporaries, who are no more: dear
Southey, one of the most eminent, is just added to the list. A few days
ago I went over to Keswick to attend his remains to their last earthly
abode. For upwards of three years his mental faculties have been in a
state of deplorable decay; and his powers of recognition, except very
rarely and but for a moment, have been, during more than half that
period, all but extinct. His bodily health was grievously impaired, and
his medical attendant says that he must have died long since but for the
very great strength of his natural constitution. As to his literary
remains, they must be very considerable, but, except his epistolary
correspondence, more or less unfinished. His letters cannot but be very
numerous, and, if carefully collected and judiciously selected, will, I
doubt not, add greatly to his reputation. He had a fine talent for that
species of composition, and took much delight in throwing off his mind
in that way. Mr. Taylor, the dramatic author, is his literary executor.

Though I have written at great, and I fear tiresome, length, I will add
a few words upon the wish you express that I would pay a tribute to the
English poets of past ages, who never had the fame they are entitled to,
and have long been almost entirely neglected. Had this been suggested to
me earlier in life, or had it come into my thoughts, the thing in all
probability would have been done. At present I cannot hope it will; but
it may afford you some satisfaction to be told, that in the MS. poem
upon my poetic education there is a whole book, of about 600 lines,[192]
upon my obligations to writers of imagination, and chiefly the poets,
though I have not expressly named those to whom you allude, and for
whom, and many others of their age, I have a high respect.

The character of the schoolmaster, about whom you inquire, had, like the
'Wanderer,' in 'The Excursion,' a solid foundation in fact and reality,
but, like him, it was also, in some degree, a composition: I will not,
and need not, call it an invention--it was no such thing; but were I to
enter into details, I fear it would impair the effect of the whole upon
your mind; nor could I do it to my own satisfaction. I send you,
according to your wish, the additions to the 'Ecclesiastical Sonnets,'
and also the last poem from my pen. I threw it off two or three weeks
ago, being in a great measure impelled to it by the desire I felt to do
justice to the memory of a heroine, whose conduct presented, some time
ago, a striking contrast to the inhumanity with which our countrymen,
shipwrecked lately upon the French coast, have been treated.

                   Ever most faithfully yours,
                          WM. WORDSWORTH.

I must request that 'Grace Darling' may not be reprinted. I should be
much obliged if you will have the enclosed Sonnets copied and sent to
Bishop Doane, who has not given me his address.

                                      W.W.[193]

[192] Prelude, book v.

[193] _Memoirs_, ii. 394-6.


132. _Offer of the Laureateship on Death of Southey_.

LETTER TO THE RIGHT HON. EARL DE LA WARR, LORD CHAMBERLAIN.

                   Rydal Mount, Ambleside, April 1. 1843.

MY LORD,

The recommendation made by your Lordship to the Queen, and graciously
approved by her Majesty, that the vacant office of Poet Laureate should
be offered to me, affords me high gratification. Sincerely am I sensible
of this honour; and let me be permitted to add, that the being deemed
worthy to succeed my lamented and revered friend, Mr. Southey, enhances
the pleasure I receive upon this occasion.

The appointment, I feel, however, imposes duties which, far advanced in
life as I am, I cannot venture to undertake, and therefore must beg
leave to decline the acceptance of an offer that I shall always remember
with no unbecoming pride.

Her Majesty will not, I trust, disapprove of a determination forced upon
me by reflections which it is impossible for me to set aside.

Deeply feeling the distinction conferred upon me, and grateful for the
terms in which your Lordship has made the communication,

                   I have the honour to be,
                     My Lord,
                      Your Lordship's most, obedient humble servant,
                          W.W.

[He thus communicates the particulars of the offer to Lady F. Bentinck:]

The Lord Chamberlain, in terms the most honourable, has, with the
Queen's approbation, offered me the vacant Laureateship. Had I been
several years younger I should have accepted the office with pride and
pleasure; but on Friday I shall enter, God willing, my 74th year, and on
account of so advanced an age I begged permission to decline it, not
venturing to undertake its duties. For though, as you are aware, the
formal task-work of New Year and Birthday Odes was abolished[194] when
the appointment was given to Mr. Southey, he still considered himself
obliged in conscience to produce, and did produce, verses, some of very
great merit, upon important public occasions. He failed to do so upon
the Queen's Coronation, and I know that this omission caused him no
little uneasiness. The same might happen to myself upon some important
occasion, and I should be uneasy under the possibility; I hope,
therefore, that neither you nor Lord Lonsdale, nor any of my friends,
will blame me for what I have done.

[194] Southey's account in his _Life and Correspondence_ renders this
statement questionable.

I was slow to send copies of 'Grace Darling' about, except to female
friends, lest I should seem to attach too much importance to the
production, though it was on a subject which interested the whole
nation. But as the verses seem to have given general pleasure, I now
venture to send the enclosed copies, one for Mr. Colvill, and the other
for my old friend Mr. O'Callaghan, begging that you would present them
at your own convenience. With the best of good wishes, and every kind
and respectful remembrance to Lord Lonsdale, who we are happy to learn
is doing so well, and also not forgetting Miss Thompson, I remain, dear
Lady Frederick,

                   Most faithfully and affectionately yours,
                           WM. WORDSWORTH.

[Wordsworth's letter did not, however, prevent the Lord Chamberlain from
pressing the offer upon him, with an assurance that the duties of
Laureate had not recently extended beyond the Annual Ode, and might in
his case be considered as merely nominal, and would not in any way
interfere with his repose and retirement.

The same post brought also the following letter:]

                   'Whitehall, April 3. 1843.

'MY DEAR SIR,

'I hope you may be induced to reconsider your decision with regard to
the appointment of Poet Laureate.

'The offer was made to you by the Lord Chamberlain, with my entire
concurrence, not for the purpose of imposing on you any onerous or
disagreeable duties, but in order to pay you that tribute of respect
which is justly due to the first of living poets.

'The Queen entirely approved of the nomination, and there is one
unanimous feeling on the part of all who have heard of the proposal
(and it is pretty generally known), that there could not be a question
about the selection.

'Do not be deterred by the fear of any obligations which the appointment
may be supposed to imply. I will undertake that you shall have nothing
_required_ from you.

'But as the Queen can select for this honourable appointment no one
whose claims for respect and honour, on account of eminence as a poet,
can be placed in competition with yours, I trust you will not longer
hesitate to accept it.

                   'Believe me, my dear Sir,
                         'With sincere esteem,
                                 'Most faithfully yours,
                                    'ROBERT PEEL.

'I write this in haste, from my place in the House of Commons.'


[These letters had the desired effect in removing the aged Poet's
scruples, and he was well pleased that the laureate wreath should be
twined round his silver hair:

    'Lauru cinge volens, Melpomene, comam.'

He replied as follows:]

TO THE RIGHT HON. THE EARL DE LA WARR.

                   Rydal Mount, Ambleside, April 4. 1843.

MY LORD,

Being assured by your Lordship's letter and by one from Sir Robert Peel,
both received this day, that the appointment to the Laureateship is to
be considered merely honorary, the apprehensions which at first
compelled me to decline accepting the offer of that appointment are
entirely removed.

Sir Robert Peel has also done me the honour of uniting his wish with
that which your Lordship has urged in a manner most gratifying to my
feelings; so that, under these circumstances, and sanctioned as the
recommendation has been by her Majesty's gracious approval, it is with
unalloyed pleasure that I accept this high distinction.

                   I have the honour to be, my Lord, most gratefully,
                     Your Lordship's obedient humble servant,
                         WILLIAM WORDSWORTH.

TO THE RT. HON. SIR ROBERT PEEL, BART., M.P.

                   Rydal Mount, Ambleside, April 4. 1843.

DEAR SIR ROBERT,

Having since my first acquaintance with Horace borne in mind the charge
which he tells us frequently thrilled his ear,

    'Solve senescentem mature sanus equum, ne
    Peccet ad extremum,'

I could not but be deterred from incurring responsibilities which I
might not prove equal to at so late a period of life; but as my mind has
been entirely set at ease by the very kind and most gratifying letter
with which you have honoured me, and by a second communication from the
Lord Chamberlain to the same effect, and in a like spirit, I have
accepted, with unqualified pleasure, a distinction sanctioned by her
Majesty, and which expresses, upon authority entitled to the highest
respect, a sense of the national importance of poetic literature; and so
favourable an opinion of the success with which it has been cultivated
by one who, after this additional mark of your esteem, cannot refrain
from again assuring you how deeply sensible he is of the many and great
obligations he owes to your goodness, and who has the honour to be,

                   Dear Sir Robert,
                     Most faithfully,
                       Your humble servant,
                          WILLIAM WORDSWORTH.

133. _Laureateship: Walter Savage Landor and Quillinan: Godson_.

LETTER TO SIR W.R. HAMILTON, DUBLIN.

                   [Undated: but 1843.]

MY DEAR SIR WILLIAM,

The sight of your handwriting was very welcome, and not the less so
because your sister had led me to expect a letter from you.

The Laureateship was offered to me in the most flattering terms, by the
Lord Chamberlain, of course with the approbation of the Queen; but I
declined it on account of my advanced age. I then received a second
letter from his Lordship, urging my acceptance of it, and assuring me
that it was intended merely as an honorary distinction for the past,
without the smallest reference to any service to be attached to it.
From Sir R. Peel I had also a letter to the same effect, and the
substance and manner of both were such that if I had still rejected the
offer, I should have been little at peace with my own mind.

Thank you for your translations. The longer poem[195] would have given
me more pain than pleasure, but for your addition, which sets all right.

[195] Referring to a translation by Sir W.R.H. of _Die Ideale_ of
Schiller, to which a stanza was added by Sir W.--G.

The attack upon W.S.L. to which you allude was written by my son-in-law;
but without any sanction from me, much less encouragement; in fact I
knew nothing about it or the preceding article of Landor, that had
called it forth, till after Mr. Q.'s had appeared. He knew very well
that I should have disapproved of his condescending to notice anything
that a man so deplorably tormented by ungovernable passion as that
unhappy creature might eject. His character may be given in two or three
words: a mad-man, a bad-man, yet a man of genius, as many a mad-man is.
I have not eyesight to spare for Periodical Literature, so with
exception of a newspaper now and then, I never look into anything of the
kind, except some particular article may be recommended to me by a
friend upon whose judgment I can rely.

You are quite at liberty to print when and where you like any verses
which you may do me the honour of writing upon, or addressing to, me.

Your godson, his sister, and four brothers, are all doing well. He is a
very clever boy, and more than that, being of an original or rather
peculiar structure of intellect, and his heart appears to be not
inferior to his head, so that I trust he will as a man do you no
discredit.


134. _Alston the Painter: Home Occupations_.

LETTER TO PROFESSOR REED.

                   Rydal Mount, Aug. 2. 1843.

MY DEAR MR. REED,

A few days ago I received a letter from a countryman of yours, the Rev.
R.C. Waterston of Boston, communicating the intelligence of the death of
that admirable artist and amiable man, my old friend, Mr. Alston. Mr. W.
and I are not acquainted, and therefore I take it very kindly that he
should have given me this melancholy information, with most interesting
particulars of the last few hours of the life of the deceased. He also
sent me a copy of verses addressed by himself to me, I presume some
little time ago, and printed in the 'Christian Souvenir.' You have
probably seen the lines, and, if so, I doubt not, you will agree with me
that they indicate a true feeling of the leading characteristics of my
poems. At least I am sure that I wished them such as he represents them
to be, too partially no doubt.

It would give me pleasure could I make this letter, so long due, more
worthy of perusal, by touching upon any topics of a public or private
nature that might interest you; but beyond the assurance which I can
give you, that I and mine are and have been in good health, I know not
where to find them. This Spring I have not left home for London, or
anywhere else; and during the progress of it and the Summer I have had
much pleasure in noting the flowers and blossoms, as they appeared and
disappeared successively; an occupation from which, at least with
reference to my own grounds, a residence in town for the three foregoing
Spring seasons cut me off. Though my health continues, thank God, to be
very good, and I am active as most men of my age, my strength for very
long walks among the mountains is of course diminishing; but, weak or
strong in body, I shall ever remain, in heart and mind,

                   Faithfully, your much obliged friend,
                          WM. WORDSWORTH.

P.S. Mr. Southey's literary executors are making a collection of his
letters, which will prove highly interesting to the public, they are so
gracefully and feelingly written.[196]

[196] _Memoirs_, ii. 404-5.


135. _Socinianism_.

LETTER TO JOSEPH COTTLE, ESQ.

                   Nov. 24. 1843.

MY DEAR MR. COTTLE,

You have treated the momentous subject[197] of Socinianism in a masterly
manner; entirely and absolutely convincing.

[197] The title of Mr. J. Cottle's work is _Essays on Socinianism_, by
Joseph Cottle. Lond.: Longmans.

                   Believe me to remain, my good old friend,
                        With great respect,
                           Faithfully yours,
                              WM. WORDSWORTH.[198]


136. _Sacred Hymns_.

LETTER TO THE REV. (AFTERWARDS DEAN) HENRY ALFORD.[199]

                   Rydal Mount, Feb. 28. 1844.

MY DEAR SIR,

I am pleased to hear what you are about, but I am far too advanced in
life to venture upon anything so difficult to do as hymns of devotion.

The one of mine which you allude to is quite at your service; only I
could wish the first line of the fifth stanza to be altered thus:

    'Each field is then a hallowed spot.'

Or you might omit the stanza altogether, if you thought proper, the
piece being long enough without it.

Wishing heartily for your success, and knowing in what able hands the
work is,

                   I remain, my dear Sir,
                       Faithfully yours,
                            WM. WORDSWORTH.[200]

[198] _Memoirs_, ii. 405-6.

[199] This was written in answer to an inquiry whether Wordsworth had by
him any hymns calculated for a collection which I was making, and asking
permission to insert his 'Noon-day Hymn.' _H.A._

[200] _Memoirs_, ii. 406.


137. _Bereavements_.

LETTER TO LADY FREDERICK BENTINCK.

                   March 31. 1844.

MY DEAR LADY FREDERICK,

We have known each other too long and too intimately for you not to be
well aware of the reasons why I have not earlier condoled with you upon
your bereavement.[201] I feel it deeply, and sympathise with you as much
and as truly as you possibly could wish. I have also grieved for the
rest of your family and household, and not the least for Miss Thompson,
whose faithful and strong attachment to your revered father I have, for
a long time, witnessed with delight and admiration. Through my kind
friend Mr. O'Brien I have heard of you both; and in his second letter he
informs me, to my great sorrow, that Miss Thompson has been exceedingly
ill. God grant that she may soon recover, as you both will stand in need
of all your bodily strength to support you under so sad a loss. But, how
much is there to be thankful for in every part of Lord Lonsdale's life
to its close! How gently was he dealt with in his last moments! and with
what fortitude and Christian resignation did he bear such pains as
attended his decline, and prepared the way for his quiet dissolution! Of
my own feelings upon this loss I shall content myself with saying, that
as long as I retain consciousness I shall cherish the memory of your
father, for his inestimable worth, and as one who honoured me with his
friendship, and who was to myself and my children the best benefactor.
The sympathy which I now offer, dear Lady Frederick, is shared by my
wife and my daughter, and my son William; and will be also participated
in by my elder son, when he hears of the sad event.

[201] Lord Lonsdale's death.

I wrote to Dr. Jackson[202] to inquire whether the funeral was to be
strictly private, and learnt from him that it is to be so; otherwise I
should not have deprived myself of the melancholy satisfaction of
attending. Accept, dear Lady Frederick, my best wishes; and be assured
of my prayers for your support; and believe me,

                   Your very affectionate friend,
                          WM. WORDSWORTH.[203]

[202] The respected Rector of Lowther, and Chancellor of the Diocese.

[203] _Memoirs_, ii. 407-8.


138. _Birthday in America and at Home: Church Poetry_.

LETTER TO PROFESSOR REED.

                   1844.

In your last letter you speak so feelingly of the manner in which my
birthday (April 7) has been noticed, both privately in your country, and
somewhat publicly in my own neighbourhood, that I cannot forbear adding
a word or two upon the subject. It would have delighted you to see the
assemblage in front of our house, some dancing upon the gravel
platform, old and young, as described in Goldsmith's travels; and
others, children, I mean, chasing each other upon the little plot of
lawn to which you descend by steps from the platform. We had music of
our own preparing; and two sets of casual itinerants, Italians and
Germans, came in successively, and enlivened the festivity. There were
present upwards of 300 children, and about 150 adults of both sexes and
all ages, the children in their best attire, and of that happy and, I
may say, beautiful race, which is spread over this highly-favoured
portion of England. The tables were tastefully arranged in the open
air[204]--oranges and gingerbread in piles decorated with evergreens and
Spring flowers; and all partook of tea, the young in the open air, and
the old within doors. I must own I wish that little commemorations of
this kind were more common among us. It is melancholy to think how
little that portion of the community which is quite at ease in their
circumstances have to do in a _social_ way with the humbler classes.
They purchase commodities of them, or they employ them as labourers, or
they visit them in charity for the sake of supplying their most urgent
wants by alms-giving. But this, alas, is far from enough; one would wish
to see the rich mingle with the poor as much as may be upon a footing of
fraternal equality. The old feudal dependencies and relations are almost
gone from England, and nothing has yet come adequately to supply their
place. There are tendencies of the right kind here and there, but they
are rather accidental than aught that is established in general manners.
Why should not great land-owners look for a substitute for what is lost
of feudal paternity in the higher principles of christianised humanity
and humble-minded brotherhood? And why should not this extend to those
vast communities which crowd so many parts of England under one head, in
the different sorts of manufacture, which, for the want of it, are too
often the pests of the social state? We are, however, improving, and I
trust that the example set by some mill-owners will not fail to
influence others.

[204] The fête was given by Miss Fenwick, then at Rydal.

It gave me pleasure to be told that Mr. Keble's Dedication of his
'Praelectiones' had fallen in your way, and that you had been struck by
it.[205]

[205] See _Memoirs_, c. xlv.

It is not for me to say how far I am entitled to the honour which he
has done me, but I can sincerely say that it has been the main scope of
my writings to do what he says I have accomplished. And where could I
find a more trustworthy judge?

What you advise in respect to a separate publication of my Church
Poetry, I have often turned in my own mind; but I have really done so
little in that way compared with the magnitude of the subject, that I
have not courage to venture on such a publication. Besides, it would
not, I fear, pay its expenses. The Sonnets were so published upon the
recommendation of a deceased nephew of mine, one of the first scholars
of Europe, and as good as he was learned. The volume did not, I believe,
clear itself, and a great part of the impression, though latterly
offered at a reduced price, still remains, I believe, in Mr. Moxon's
hands. In this country people who do not grudge laying out their money
for new publications on personal or fugitive interests, that every one
is talking about, are very unwilling to part with it for literature
which is unindebted to temporary excitement. If they buy such at all, it
must be in some form for the most part that has little to recommend it
but low price.

And now, my dear Sir, with many thanks for the trouble you have been at,
and affectionate wishes for your welfare,

                   Believe me faithfully yours,
                         WM. WORDSWORTH.


139. _Class-fellows and School-fellows_.

LETTER TO BASIL MONTAGU, ESQ.

                   Rydal Mount, Oct. 1. 1844.

MY DEAR MONTAGU,

Absence from home has prevented my replying earlier to your letter,
which gave me much pleasure on many accounts, and particularly as I
learned from it that you are so industrious, and to such good effect. I
don't wonder at your mention of the friends whom we have lost by death.
Bowles the poet still lives, and Rogers--all that survive of the
poetical fraternity with whom I have had any intimacy. Southey,
Campbell, and Cary, are no more. Of my class-fellows and schoolfellows
very few remain; my _intimate_ associates of my own college are all
gone long since. Myers my cousin, Terrot, Jones my fellow-traveller,
Fleming and his brother Raincock of Pembroke, Bishop Middleton of the
same college--it has pleased God that I should survive them all. Then
there are none left but Joseph Cottle of the many friends I made at
Bristol and in Somersetshire; yet we are only in our 75th year. But
enough of this sad subject; let us be resigned under all dispensations,
and thankful; for that is our duty, however difficult it may be to
perform it. I send you the lock of hair which you desired, white as
snow, and taken from a residue which is thinning rapidly.

You neither mention your own health nor Mrs. Montagu's; I conclude,
therefore, that both of you are doing well. Pray remember me kindly to
her; and believe me, my dear Montagu, your faithful and affectionate
friend,

                   WM. WORDSWORTH.

In speaking of our Bristol friends I forgot to mention John Pinney, but
him I have neither seen nor heard of for many years.[206]

[206] _Memoirs_, ii. 411-12.


140. _'From Home:' The Queen: Review of Poems, &c._

LETTER TO PROFESSOR REED.

                   Nov. 18. 1844.

MY DEAR MR. REED,

Mrs. Wordsworth and I have been absent from home for a month past, and
we deferred acknowledging your acceptable letter till our return. Among
the places to which we went on visits to our friends was Cambridge,
where I was happy to learn that great improvement was going on among the
young men. They were become much more regular in their conduct, and
attentive to their duties. Our host was the master of Trinity College,
Dr. Whewell, successor to my brother, Dr. Wordsworth, who filled the
office for more than twenty years highly to his honour, and resigned
before he was disqualified by age, lest, as his years advanced, his
judgment might be impaired, and his powers become unfit for the
responsibility without his being aware of it. This, you will agree with
me, was a noble example: may it be followed by others!

On our return home we were detained two hours at Northampton by the vast
crowd assembled to greet the Queen on her way to Burleigh House. Shouts
and ringing of bells there were in abundance; but these are things of
course. It did please us, however, greatly to see every village we
passed through for the space of twenty-two miles decorated with
triumphal arches, and every cottage, however humble, with its little
display of laurel boughs and flowers hung from the windows and over the
doors. The people, young and old, were all making it holiday, and the
Queen could not but be affected with these universal manifestations of
affectionate loyalty. As I have said, we were detained two hours, and I
much regret that it did not strike me at the moment to throw off my
feelings in verse, for I had ample time to have done so, and might,
perhaps, have contrived to present through some of the authorities the
tribute to my Royal Mistress. How must these words shock your republican
ears! But you are too well acquainted with mankind and their history not
to be aware that love of country can clothe itself in many shapes.

I need not say what pleasure it would give us to see you and Mrs. Reed
in our beautiful place of abode.

I have no wish to see the review of my poems to which you allude, nor
should I read it if it fell in my way. It is too late in life for me to
profit by censure, and I am indifferent to praise merely as such. Mrs.
Wordsworth will be happy to write her opinion of the portrait as you
request.

                   Believe me, my dear Mr. Reed,
                       Faithfully yours,
                           WM. WORDSWORTH.[207]

[207] _Memoirs_, ii. 412-13.


141. _The Laureateship: Contemporaries, &c.: Tennyson_.

LETTER TO PROFESSOR REED.

                   Rydal Mount, Ambleside, July 1. 1845.

MY DEAR MR. REED,

I have, as usual, been long in your debt, which I am pretty sure you
will excuse as heretofore. It gave me much pleasure to have a glimpse of
your brother under circumstances which no doubt he will have described
to you. He spoke of his health as improved, and I hope it will continue
to do so. I understood from him that it was probable he should call at
Rydal before his return to his own country. I need not say to you I
shall be glad, truly glad, to see him both for his own sake, and as so
nearly connected with you. My absence from home lately was not of more
than three weeks. I took the journey to London solely to pay my respects
to the Queen upon my appointment to the Laureateship upon the decease of
my friend Mr. Southey. The weather was very cold, and I caught an
inflammation in one of my eyes, which rendered my stay in the south very
uncomfortable. I nevertheless did, in respect to the object of my
journey, all that was required. The reception given me by the Queen at
her ball was most gracious. Mrs. Everett, the wife of your minister,
among many others, was a witness to it, without knowing who I was. It
moved her to the shedding of tears. This effect was in part produced, I
suppose, by American habits of feeling, as pertaining to a republican
government. To see a grey-haired man of seventy-five years of age,
kneeling down in a large assembly to kiss the hand of a young woman, is
a sight for which institutions essentially democratic do not prepare a
spectator of either sex, and must naturally place the opinions upon
which a republic is founded, and the sentiments which support it, in
strong contrast with a government based and upheld as ours is. I am not,
therefore, surprised that Mrs. Everett was moved, as she herself
described to persons of my acquaintance, among others to Mr. Rogers the
poet. By the by, of this gentleman, now I believe in his eighty-third
year, I saw more than of any other person except my host, Mr. Moxon,
while I was in London. He is singularly fresh and strong for his years,
and his mental faculties (with the exception of his memory a little) not
at all impaired. It is remarkable that he and the Rev. W. Bowles were
both distinguished as poets when I was a school-boy, and they have
survived almost all their eminent contemporaries, several of whom came
into notice long after them. Since they became known, Burns, Cowper,
Mason the author of 'Caractacus' and friend of Gray, have died. Thomas
Warton, Laureate, then Byron, Shelley, Keats, and a good deal later[208]
Scott, Coleridge, Crabbe, Southey, Lamb, the Ettrick Shepherd, Cary the
translator of Dante, Crowe the author of 'Lewesdon Hill,' and others of
more or less distinction, have disappeared. And now of English poets,
advanced in life, I cannot recall any but James Montgomery, Thomas
Moore, and myself, who are living, except the octogenarian with whom I
began.

[208]

Walter Scott died 21st Sept. 1832. S.T. Coleridge " 25th July 1834.
Charles Lamb " 27th Dec. 1834. Geo. Crabbe " 3rd Feb. 1832. Felicia
Hemans " 16th May 1835. Robert Southey " 21st March 1843.


I saw Tennyson, when I was in London, several times. He is decidedly the
first of our living poets, and I hope will live to give the world still
better things. You will be pleased to hear that he expressed in the
strongest terms his gratitude to my writings. To this I was far from
indifferent, though persuaded that he is not much in sympathy with what
I should myself most value in my attempts, viz. the spirituality with
which I have endeavoured to invest the material universe, and the moral
relations under which I have wished to exhibit its most ordinary
appearances. I ought not to conclude this first portion of my letter
without telling you that I have now under my roof a cousin, who some
time ago was introduced, improperly, I think, she being then a child, to
the notice of the public, as one of the English poetesses, in an article
of the _Quarterly_ so entitled. Her name is Emmeline Fisher, and her
mother is my first cousin. What advances she may have made in latter
years I do not know, but her productions from the age of eight to twelve
were not less than astonishing. She only arrived yesterday, and we
promise ourselves much pleasure in seeing more of her. Our dear friend
Miss Fenwick is also under our roof; so is Katharine Southey, her late
father's youngest daughter, so that we reckon ourselves rich; though our
only daughter is far from us, being gone to Oporto with her husband on
account of her enfeebled frame: and most unfortunately, soon after her
arrival, she was seized with a violent attack of rheumatic fever caused
by exposure to the evening air. We have also been obliged lately to part
with four grandsons, very fine boys, who are gone with their father to
Italy to visit their mother, kept there by severe illness, which sent
her abroad two years ago. Under these circumstances we old people keep
our spirits as well as we can, trusting the end to God's goodness.

Now, for the enclosed poem,[209] which I wrote the other day, and which
I send to you, hoping it may give you some pleasure, as a scanty
repayment for all that we owe you. Our dear friend, Miss Fenwick, is
especially desirous that her warmest thanks should be returned to you
for all the trouble you have taken about her bonds. But, to return to
the verses: if you approve, pray forward them with my compliments and
thanks for his letter to ----. In his letter he states that with others
he is strenuously exerting himself in endeavours to abolish slavery,
and, as one of the means of disposing the public mind to that measure,
he is about to publish selections from various authors in behalf of
_humanity_. He begs an original composition from me. I have nothing
bearing directly upon slavery, but if you think this little piece would
serve his cause indirectly, pray be so kind as to forward it to him. He
speaks of himself as deeply indebted to my writings.

[209] The poem enclosed is 'The Westmoreland Girl,' dated June 6, 1845.
The text corresponds with that in the one volume edition, with the
exception of the two stanzas added in the next letter; and in the 1st
stanza 'thoughtless' has been substituted for 'simple;' and in the 18th
'is laid' for 'must lie.' _H.R._

I have not left room to subscribe myself more than

                   Affectionately yours,
                          WM. WORDSWORTH.[210]

[210] _Memoirs_, ii. 414-17.


142. _'Poems of Imagination:' New Edition, &c.: Portrait, &c._

LETTER TO PROFESSOR REED.

                   Brinsop Court, Sept. 27 [1845].

MY DEAR MR. REED,

The sight of your letter was very welcome, and its contents proved most
agreeable. It was well that you did not forward my little poem to the
party, he entertaining the opinions he holds, and being of the character
you describe. I shall therefore be gratified if you, as you propose,
write him a note, expressing that I have nothing among my MSS. that
would suit his purpose. The verses are already printed in the new
edition of my poems (double column), which is going through the press.
It will contain about 300 verses not found in the previous edition. I do
not remember whether I have mentioned to you that, following your
example, I have greatly extended the class entitled 'Poems of the
Imagination,' thinking, as you must have done, that if imagination were
predominant in the class, it was not indispensable that it should
pervade every poem which it contained. Limiting the class as I had done
before seemed to imply, and to the uncandid or unobserving it did so,
that the faculty, which is the _primum mobile_ in poetry, had little to
do, in the estimation of the author, with the pieces not arranged under
that head. I, therefore, feel much obliged to you for suggesting by your
practice the plan which I have adopted. In respect to the Prefaces, my
own wish would be that now the Poems should be left to speak for
themselves without them; but I know that this would not answer for the
purposes of sale. They will, therefore, be printed at the end of the
volume; and to this I am in some degree reconciled by the matter they
contain relating to poetry in general, and the principles they
inculcate. I hope that, upon the whole, the edition will please you. In
a very few instances I have altered the expression for the worse, on
account of the same feeling or word occurring rather too near the
passage. For example, the Sonnet on Baptism begins '_Blest_ be the
Church.' But unfortunately the word occurs some three or four lines just
before or after; I have, therefore, though reluctantly, substituted the
less impressive word, '_Dear_ be the Church.' I mention this solely to
prevent blame on your part in this and a few similar cases where an
injurious change has been made. The book will be off my hands I hope in
about two weeks.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mrs. Wordsworth and I left home four days ago, and do not intend to
return, if all goes well, in less than five or six weeks from this time.
We purpose in our way home to visit York, the cathedral of which city
has been restored; and then we shall go to Leeds, on a visit to our
friend Mr. James Marshall, in full expectation that we shall be highly
delighted by the humane and judicious manner in which his manufactory is
managed, and by inspecting the schools which he and his brother have
established and superintended. We also promise ourselves much pleasure
from the sight of the magnificent church, which, upon the foundation of
the old parish church of that town, has been built through the exertions
and by the munificence of the present incumbent, that excellent and able
man Dr. Hook, whom I have the honour of reckoning among my friends.

This letter is written by the side of my brother-in-law, who, eight
years ago, became a cripple, confined to his chair, by the accident of
his horse falling with him in the high road, where he lay without power
to move either hand or leg, but left in perfect possession of his
faculties. His bodily sufferings are by this time somewhat abated, but
they still continue severe. His patience and cheerfulness are so
admirable that I could not forbear mentioning him to you. He is an
example to us all; and most undeserving should we be if we did not
profit by it. His family have lately succeeded in persuading him to have
his portrait taken as he sits in his arm-chair. It is an excellent
likeness, one of the best I ever saw, and will be invaluable to his
family. This reminds me of Mr. Inman and a promise which he made that he
would send us a copy of your portrait of myself. I say a promise, though
it scarcely amounted to that absolutely, but it was little short of it.
Do you think he could find time to act upon his own wish in this matter?
in which I feel interested on Mrs. Wordsworth's account, who reckons
that portrait much the best both as to likeness and execution of all
that have been made of me, and she is an excellent judge. In adverting
to this subject, I of course presume that you would have no objection to
the picture being copied if the artist were inclined to do it.

My paper admonishes me that I must conclude. Pray let me know in your
next how Mrs. Reed and your family are in health, and present my good
wishes to her.

                   Ever your faithful and much obliged friend,
                      WM. WORDSWORTH.[211]


143. _Of the College of Maynooth, &c._

LETTER TO A NEPHEW.

                   Rydal Mount, June 30. 1845.

MY DEAR C----,

I ought to have acknowledged my debt to you long ago, but the
inflammation in one of my eyes which seized me on my first arrival in
London kept its ground for a long time. I had your two first pamphlets
read to me, and immediately put them into circulation among my friends
in this neighbourhood; but wishing to read them myself I did not like to
write to you till I had done so, as there were one or two passages on
which I wished to make a remark.

[211] _Memoirs_, ii. 418-21.

As to your arguments, they are unanswerable, and the three tracts do you
the greatest possible credit; but the torrent cannot be stemmed, unless
we can construct a body, I will not call it a party, upon a new and true
principle of action, as you have set forth. Certain questions are forced
by the present conduct of government upon the mind of every observing
and thinking person. First and foremost, are we to have a _national_
English Church, or is the Church of England to be regarded merely as a
sect? and is the _right to the Throne to be put on a new foundation_? Is
the present ministry prepared for this, and all that must precede and
follow it? Is Ireland an integral and inseparable portion of the Empire
or not? If it be, I cannot listen to the argument in favour of endowing
Romanism upon the ground of superiority of _numbers_. The Romanists are
not a majority in England and Ireland, taken, as they ought to be,
together. As to Scotland, it has its separate kirk by especial covenant.
Are the ministers prepared to alter fundamentally the basis of the Union
between England and Ireland, and to construct a new one? If they be, let
them tell us so at once. In short, they are involving themselves and the
Nation in difficulties from which there is no escape--for them at least
none. What I have seen of your letter to Lord John M---- I like as well
as your two former tracts, and I shall read it carefully at my first
leisure moment.[212]

[212] _Memoirs_, ii. 151-2.


144. _Of the 'Heresiarch of the Church of Rome.'_

LETTER TO JOSEPH COTTLE, ESQ.

                   Rydal Mount, Dec. 6. 1845.

MY DEAR OLD FRIEND,

Now for your little tract, 'Heresiarch Church of Rome.' I have perused
it carefully, and go the whole length with you in condemnation of
Romanism, and probably _much further_, by reason of my having passed at
least three years of life in countries where Romanism was the prevailing
or exclusive religion; and if we are to trust the declaration 'By their
fruits ye shall know them,' I have stronger reasons, in the privilege I
have named, for passing a severe condemnation upon leading parts of
their faith, and courses of their practice, than others who have never
been eye-witnesses of the evils to which I allude. Your little
publication is well timed, and will I trust have such an effect as you
aimed at upon the minds of its readers.

And now let me bid you affectionately good bye, with assurance that I do
and shall retain to the last a remembrance of your kindness, and of the
many pleasant and happy hours which, at one of the most interesting
periods of my life, I passed in your neighbourhood, and in your company.

                   Ever most faithfully yours,
                         WILLIAM WORDSWORTH.[213]

[213] _Memoirs_, ii. 152-3.


145. _Family Trials_.

LETTER TO PROFESSOR REED.

                   Rydal Mount, Jan. 23. 1846.

MY DEAR MR. REED,

       *       *       *       *       *

I hope to be able to send you an impression of an engraving, from a
picture of Mr. Haydon, representing me in the act of climbing Helvellyn.
There is great merit in this work, and the sight of it will show my
meaning on the subject of _expression_. This, I think, is attained; but,
then, I am stooping, and the inclination of the head necessarily causes
a foreshortening of the features below the nose, which takes from the
likeness accordingly; so that, upon the whole, yours has the advantage,
especially under the circumstance of your never having seen the
original. Mrs. Wordsworth has been looking over your letters in vain to
find the address of the person in London, through whose hands any parcel
for you might be sent. Pray take the trouble of repeating the address in
your next letter, and your request shall be attended to of sending you
my two letters upon the offensive subject of a Railway to and through
our beautiful neighbourhood.

       *       *       *       *       *

You will be sorry to hear that Mrs. Wordsworth and I have been, and
still are, under great trouble and anxiety. Our daughter-in-law fell
into bad health between three and four years ago. She went with her
husband to Madeira, where they remained nearly a year; she was then
advised to go to Italy. After a prolonged residence there, her six
children, whom her husband returned to England for, went, at her earnest
request, to that country, under their father's guidance: there he was
obliged, on account of his duty as a clergyman, to leave them. Four of
the number resided with their mother at Rome, three of whom took a fever
there, of which the youngest, as noble a boy, of nearly five years, as
ever was seen, died, being seized with convulsions when the fever was
somewhat subdued. The father, in a distracted state of mind, is just
gone back to Italy; and we are most anxious to hear the result. My only
surviving brother, also, the late Master of Trinity College, Cambridge,
and an inestimable person, is in an alarming state of health; and the
only child of my eldest brother, long since deceased, is now languishing
under mortal illness at Ambleside. He was educated to the medical
profession, and caught his illness while on duty in the Mediterranean.
He is a truly amiable and excellent young man, and will be universally
regretted. These sad occurrences, with others of like kind, have thrown
my mind into a state of feeling, which the other day vented itself in
the two sonnets which Mrs. Wordsworth will transcribe as the best
acknowledgment she can make for Mrs. Reed's and your kindness.

                   Ever faithfully and affectionately yours,
                          WM. WORDSWORTH.[214]

[214] _Memoirs_, ii. 422-3.


146. _Bishop White: Mormonites, &c._

LETTER TO PROFESSOR REED.

                   February 3. 1846.

MY DEAR MR. REED,

I was much shocked to find that my last had been despatched without
acknowledgment for your kindness in sending me the admirable engraving
of Bishop White, which I was delighted, on many accounts, to receive.
This omission was owing to the distressed state of mind in which I
wrote, and which I throw myself on your goodness to excuse. I ought to
have written again by next post, but we really have been, and still are,
in such trouble from various causes, that I could not take up the pen,
and now must beg you to accept this statement as the only excuse which I
can offer. We have had such accounts from my daughter-in-law at Rome,
that her mother and brother are just gone thither to support her, her
mother being seventy years of age.

Do you know anything of a wretched set of religionists in your country,
_Superstitionists_ I ought to say, called Mormonites, or latter-day
saints? Would you believe it? a niece of Mrs. Wordsworth's has just
embarked, we believe at Liverpool, with a set of the deluded followers
of that wretch, in an attempt to join their society. Her name is ----, a
young woman of good abilities and well educated, but early in life she
took from her mother and her connections a methodistical turn, and has
gone on in a course of what she supposes to be piety till she has come
to this miserable close. If you should by chance hear anything about
her, pray let us know.

The report of my brother's decease, which we look for every day, has not
yet reached us. My nephew is still lingering on from day to day.

                   Ever faithfully and affectionately yours,
                           WM. WORDSWORTH.

The print of Bishop White is noble, everything, indeed, that could be
wished.[215]

[215] _Memoirs_, ii. 424-5.


147. _Governor Malartie: Lord Hector of Glasgow University, &c._

LETTER TO SIR W. GOMM. &c. &c., PORT LOUIS, MAURITIUS.

                   Rydal Mount, Ambleside, Nov. 23. 1846.

DEAR SIR WILLIAM,

Your kind letter of the 4th of August I have just received; and I thank
you sincerely for this mark of your attention, and for the gratification
it afforded me. It is pleasing to see fancy amusements giving birth to
works of solid profit, as, under the auspices of Lady Gomm, they are
doing in your island.

Your sonnet addressed to the unfinished monument of Governor Malartie is
conceived with appropriate feeling and just discrimination. Long may the
finished monument last as a tribute to departed worth, and as a check
and restraint upon intemperate desires for change, to which the
inhabitants of the island may hereafter be liable!

Before this letter reaches you the newspapers will probably have told
you that I have been recently put in nomination, unknown to myself, for
the high office of Lord Rector of the University of Glasgow; and that
there was a majority of twenty-one votes in my favour, in opposition to
the premier, Lord John Russell. The forms of the election, however,
allowed Lord John Russell to be returned, through the single vote of the
sub-rector voting for his superior. To say the truth, I am glad of this
result; being too advanced in life to undertake with comfort any
considerable public duty, and it might have seemed ungracious to decline
the office.

Men of rank, or of high station, with the exception of the poet
Campbell, who was, I believe, educated at this university, have almost
invariably been chosen for a rector of this ancient university; and that
another exception was made in my favour by a considerable majority
affords a proof that literature, independent of office, does not want
due estimation. I should not have dwelt so long upon this subject, had
anything personal to myself occurred in which you could have taken
interest.

As you do not mention your own health, or that of Lady Gomm, I infer
with pleasure that the climate agrees with you both. That this may
continue to be so is my earnest and sincere wish, in which Mrs.
Wordsworth cordially unites.

                   Believe me, dear Sir William,
                        Faithfully yours,
                            WILLIAM WORDSWORTH.[216]


148. _Death of 'Dora.'_

                   [Received July 10. 1847.]

MY DEAR C----,

Last night (I ought to have said a quarter before one this morning), it
pleased God to take to Himself the spirit of our beloved daughter, and
your truly affectionate cousin. She had latterly much bodily suffering,
under which she supported herself by prayer, and gratitude to her
heavenly Father, for granting her to the last so many of His blessings.

[216] _Memoirs_, ii. 432-3.

I need not write more. Your aunt bears up under this affliction as
becomes a Christian.

Kindest love to Susan, of whose sympathy we are fully assured.

Your affectionate uncle, and the more so for this affliction,

WM. WORDSWORTH.[217]

Pray for us!


149. _Of the Same: Sorrow_.

We bear up under our affliction as well as God enables us to do. But oh!
my dear friend, our loss is immeasurable. God bless you and yours.[218]

Our sorrow, I feel, is for life; but God's will be done![219]

[217] _Memoirs_, ii. 434.

[218] To Mr. Moxon, Aug. 9, 1847.

[219] 29th Dec. 1847.


150.

TO JOHN PEACE, ESQ.

                   Brigham [Postmark, 'Cockermouth,
                         Nov. 18. 1848'].

MY DEAR FRIEND,

Mrs. Wordsworth has deputed to me the acceptable office of answering
your friendly letter, which has followed us to Brigham, upon the banks
of the river Derwent, near Cockermouth, the birthplace of four brothers
and their sister. Of these four, I, the second, am now the only one
left. Am I wrong in supposing that you have been here? The house was
driven out of its place by a railway, and stands now nothing like so
advantageously for a prospect of this beautiful country, though at only
a small distance from its former situation.

We are expecting Mr. Cuthbert Southey to-day, from his curacy, seven or
eight miles distant. He is busy in carrying through the press the first
volume of his father's letters, or rather, collecting and preparing them
for it. Do you happen to have any in your possession? If so, be so kind
as to let me or his son know what they are, if you think they contain
anything which would interest the public.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mrs. W. and I are, thank God, both in good health, and possessing a
degree of strength beyond what is usual at our age, being both in our
seventy-ninth year. The beloved daughter whom it has pleased God to
remove from this anxious and sorrowful world, I have not mentioned; but
I can judge of the depth of your fellow-feeling for us. Many thanks to
you for referring to the text in Scripture which I quoted to you so long
ago.[220] 'Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done.' He who does not find
support and consolation there, will find it nowhere. God grant that it
may he continued to me and mine, and to all sufferers! Believe me, with
Mrs. W.'s very kind remembrance,

                   Faithfully yours,
                       WM. WORDSWORTH.

       *       *       *       *       *

When you see Mr. Cottle, pray remember us most affectionately to him,
with respectful regards to his sister.[221]


151. _Illness and Death of a Servant at Rydal Mount_.

Our anxieties are over, and our sorrow is not without heartfelt, I may
say heavenly, consolation. Dear, and good, and faithful, and dutiful
Jane breathed her last about twelve o'clock last night. The doctor had
seen her at noon; he found her much weaker. She said to him, 'I cannot
stand now,' but he gave us no reason to believe her end was so very
near. You shall hear all particulars when we are permitted to meet,
which God grant may be soon. Nothing could be more gentle than her
departure.

Yesterday Mary read to her in my presence some chapters from the New
Testament, and her faculties were as clear as any one's in perfect
health, and so they have ever been to the last.[222]

[220] [Note by Mr. Peace.] At Rydal Mount in 1838. Ephesians v. 20. 'My
favourite text,' said he.

[221] _Memoirs_, ii. 435-6.

[222] _Ibid._ ii. 501-2.


152. _Humility_.

Writing to a friend, he says: 'I feel myself in so many respects
unworthy of your love, and too likely to become more so.' (This was in
1844.) 'Worldly-minded I am not; on the contrary, my wish to benefit
those within my humble sphere strengthens seemingly in exact proportion
to my inability to realise those wishes. What I lament most is, that the
spirituality of my nature does not expand and rise the nearer I
approach the grave, as yours does, and as it fares with my beloved
partner. The pleasure which I derive from God's works in His visible
creation is not with me, I think, impaired, but reading does not
interest me as it used to do, and I feel that I am becoming daily a less
instructive companion to others. Excuse this egotism. I feel it
necessary to your understanding what I am, and how little you would gain
by habitual intercourse with me, however greatly I might benefit from
intercourse with you.'[223]


153. _Hopefulness_.

Writing to a friend at a time of public excitement, he thus speaks:
'After all (as an excellent Bishop of the Scotch Church said to a
friendly correspondent of mine), "Be of good heart; the affairs of the
world will be conducted as heretofore,--by the foolishness of man and
the wisdom of God."'[224]

[223] _Memoirs_, ii. 502-3.

[224] _Ibid._ ii. 503.




III. CONVERSATIONS AND PERSONAL REMINISCENCES OF WORDSWORTH.

(_a_) FROM 'SATYRANE'S LETTERS:' KLOPSTOCK.

(_b_) PERSONAL REMINISCENCES OF THE HON. MR. JUSTICE COLERIDGE.

(_c_) RECOLLECTIONS OF A TOUR IN ITALY, BY H.C. ROBINSON.

(_d_) REMINISCENCES OF LADY RICHARDSON AND MRS. DAVY.

(_e_) CONVERSATIONS AND REMINISCENCES RECORDED BY THE BISHOP OF LINCOLN.

(_f_) REMINISCENCES OF REV. R.P. GRAVES, M.A., DUBLIN.

(_g_) ON DEATH OF COLERIDGE.

(_h_) FURTHER REMINISCENCES AND MEMORABILIA, BY REV. R.P. GRAVES, M.A.,
DUBLIN, NOW FIRST PUBLISHED.

(_i_) AN AMERICAN'S REMINISCENCES.

(_j_) RECOLLECTIONS OF AUBREY DE VERE, ESQ., NOW FIRST PUBLISHED.

(_k_) FROM 'RECOLLECTIONS OF THE LAST DAYS OF SHELLEY AND BYRON,' BY
E.J. TRELAWNY, ESQ.

(_l_) FROM LETTERS OF PROFESSOR TAYLER (1872).

(_m_) ANECDOTE OF CRABBE, FROM DIARY OF SIR WALTER SCOTT.

(_n_) WORDSWORTH'S LATER OPINION OF LORD BROUGHAM.

NOTE.

On these 'Personal Reminiscences' see the Preface in Vol. I. G.


(_a_) KLOPSTOCK: NOTES OF HIS CONVERSATION.

From 'Satyrane's Letters' (_Biographia Literaria_, vol. ii. pp. 228-254,
ed. 1847).

                   Ratzeburg.

No little fish thrown back again into the water, no fly unimprisoned
from a child's hand, could more buoyantly enjoy its element, than I this
clean and peaceful house, with this lovely view of the town, groves, and
lake of Ratzeburg, from the window at which I am writing. My spirits
certainly, and my health I fancied, were beginning to sink under the
noise, dirt, and unwholesome air of our Hamburg hotel. I left it on
Sunday, Sept. 23rd. with a letter of introduction from the poet
Klopstock, to the _Amtmann_ of Ratzeburg. The _Amtmann_ received me with
kindness, and introduced me to the worthy pastor, who agreed to board
and lodge me for any length of time not less than a month. The vehicle,
in which I took my place, was considerably larger than an English
stage-coach, to which it bore much the same proportion and rude
resemblance, that an elephant's ear does to the human. Its top was
composed of naked boards of different colours, and seeming to have been
parts of different wainscots. Instead of windows there were leathern
curtains with a little eye of glass in each: they perfectly answered the
purpose of keeping out the prospect and letting in the cold. I could
observe little, therefore, but the inns and farm-houses at which we
stopped. They were all alike, except in size: one great room, like a
barn, with a hay-loft over it, the straw and hay dangling in tufts
through the boards which formed the ceiling of the room, and the floor
of the loft. From this room, which is paved like a street, sometimes
one, sometimes two smaller ones, are enclosed at one end. These are
commonly floored. In the large room the cattle, pigs, poultry, men,
women, and children, live in amicable community: yet there was an
appearance of cleanliness and rustic comfort. One of these houses I
measured. It was an hundred feet in length. The apartments were taken
off from one corner. Between these and the stalls there was a small
interspace, and here the breadth was forty-eight feet, but thirty-two
where the stalls were; of course, the stalls were on each side eight
feet in depth. The faces of the cows &c. were turned towards the room;
indeed they were in it, so that they had at least the comfort of seeing
each other's faces. Stall-feeding is universal in this part of Germany,
a practice concerning which the agriculturist and the poet are likely to
entertain opposite opinions--or at least, to have very different
feelings. The wood-work of these buildings on the outside is left
unplastered, as in old houses among us, and, being painted red and
green, it cuts and tesselates the buildings very gaily. From within
three miles of Hamburg almost to Molln, which is thirty miles from it,
the country, as far as I could see it was a dead flat, only varied by
woods. At Molln it became more beautiful. I observed a small lake nearly
surrounded with groves, and a palace in view belonging to the King of
Great Britain, and inhabited by the Inspector of the Forests. We were
nearly the same time in travelling the thirty-five miles from Hamburg to
Ratzeburg, as we had been in going from London to Yarmouth, one hundred
and twenty-six miles.

The lake of Ratzeburg runs from south to north, about nine miles in
length, and varying in breadth from three miles to half a mile. About a
mile from the southernmost point it is divided into two, of course very
unequal, parts by an island, which, being connected by a bridge and a
narrow slip of land with the one shore, and by another bridge of immense
length with the other shore, forms a complete isthmus. On this island
the town of Ratzeburg is built. The pastor's house or vicarage, together
with the _Amtmann's, Amtsschreiber's_, and the church, stands near the
summit of a hill, which slopes down to the slip of land and the little
bridge, from which, through a superb military gate, you step into the
island-town of Ratzeburg. This again is itself a little hill, by
ascending and descending which, you arrive at the long bridge, and so to
the other shore. The water to the south of the town is called the Little
Lake, which however almost engrosses the beauties of the whole: the
shores being just often enough green and bare to give the proper effect
to the magnificent groves which occupy the greater part of their
circumference. From the turnings, windings, and indentations of the
shore, the views vary almost every ten steps, and the whole has a sort
of majestic beauty, a feminine grandeur. At the north of the Great
Lake, and peeping over it, I see the seven church towers of Lubec, at
the distance of twelve or thirteen miles, yet as distinctly as if they
were not three. The only defect in the view is, that Ratzeburg is built
entirely of red bricks, and all the houses roofed with red tiles. To the
eye, therefore, it presents a clump of brick-dust red. Yet this evening,
Oct. 10th. twenty minutes past five, I saw the town perfectly beautiful,
and the whole softened down into _complete keeping_, if I may borrow a
term from the painters. The sky over Ratzeburg and all the east was a
pure evening blue, while over the west it was covered with light sandy
clouds. Hence a deep red light spread over the whole prospect, in
undisturbed harmony with the red town, the brown-red woods, and the
yellow-red reeds on the skirts of the lake. Two or three boats, with
single persons paddling them, floated up and down in the rich light,
which not only was itself in harmony with all, but brought all into
harmony.

I should have told you that I went back to Hamburg on Thursday (Sept.
27th.) to take leave of my friend, who travels southward, and returned
hither on the Monday following. From Empfelde, a village half way from
Ratzeburg, I walked to Hamburg through deep sandy roads and a dreary
flat: the soil everywhere white, hungry, and excessively pulverised; but
the approach to the city is pleasing. Light cool country houses, which
you can look through and see the gardens behind them, with arbours and
trellis work, and thick vegetable walls, and trees in cloisters and
piazzas, each house with neat rails before it, and green seats within
the rails. Every object, whether the growth of Nature or the work of
man, was neat and artificial. It pleased me far better, than if the
houses and gardens, and pleasure fields, had been in a nobler taste: for
this nobler taste would have been mere apery. The busy, anxious,
money-loving merchant of Hamburg could only have adopted, he could not
have enjoyed the simplicity of Nature. The mind begins to love Nature by
imitating human conveniences in Nature; but this is a step in intellect,
though a low one--and were it not so, yet all around me spoke of
innocent enjoyment and sensitive comforts, and I entered with
unscrupulous sympathy into the enjoyments and comforts even of the busy,
anxious, money-loving merchants of Hamburg. In this charitable and
_catholic_ mood I reached the vast ramparts of the city. These are huge
green cushions, one rising above the other, with trees growing in the
interspaces, pledges and symbols of a long peace. Of my return I have
nothing worth communicating, except that I took extra post, which
answers to posting in England. These north German post chaises are
uncovered wicker carts. An English dust-cart is a piece of finery, a
_chef d'oeuvre_ of mechanism, compared with them: and the horses!--a
savage might use their ribs instead of his fingers for a numeration
table. Wherever we stopped, the postilion fed his cattle with the brown
rye bread of which he eat himself, all breakfasting together; only the
horses had no gin to their water, and the postilion no water to his gin.
Now and henceforward for subjects of more interest to you, and to the
objects in search of which I loft you: namely, the _literati_ and
literature of Germany.

Believe me, I walked with an impression of awe on my spirits, as W----
and myself accompanied Mr. Klopstock to the house of his brother, the
poet, which stands about a quarter of a mile from the city gate. It is
one of a row of little common-place summer-houses, (for so they looked,)
with four or five rows of young meagre elm trees before the windows,
beyond which is a green, and then a dead flat intersected with several
roads. Whatever beauty, (thought I,) may be before the poet's eyes at
present, it must certainly be purely of his own creation. We waited a
few minutes in a neat little parlour, ornamented with the figures of two
of the Muses and with prints, the subjects of which were from
Klopstock's odes.[225]

[225] 'There is a rhetorical amplitude and brilliancy in the Messias,'
says Mr. Carlyle, 'which elicits in our critic (Mr. Taylor) an instinct
truer than his philosophy is. Neither has the still purer spirit of
Klopstock's odes escaped him. Perhaps there is no writing in our
language that offers so correct an emblem of him as this analysis.' I
remember thinking Taylor's 'clear outline' of the Messias the most
satisfying account of a poem I ever read: it fills the mind with a
vision of pomp and magnificence, which it is pleasanter to contemplate,
as it were, from afar, massed together in that general survey, than to
examine part by part. Mr. Taylor and Mr. Carlyle agree in exalting that
ode of Klopstock's, in which he represents the Muse of Britain and the
Muse of Germany running a race. The piece seems to me more rhetorical
than strictly poetical; and if the younger Muse's power of keeping up
the race depends on productions of this sort, I would not give a penny
for her chance, at least if the contest relates to pure poetry.
Klopstock's _Herman_ (mentioned afterwards,) consists of three
chorus-dramas, as Mr. Taylor calls them: _The Battle of Herman_, _Herman
and the Princes_, and _The Death of Herman_. Herman is the Arminius of
the Roman historians. S.C.

The poet entered. I was much disappointed in his countenance, and
recognised in it no likeness to the bust. There was no comprehension in
the forehead, no weight over the eye-brows, no expression of
peculiarity, moral or intellectual, on the eyes, no massiveness in the
general countenance. He is, if anything, rather below the middle size.
He wore very large half-boots, which his legs filled, so fearfully were
they swollen. However, though neither W---- nor myself could discover
any indications of sublimity or enthusiasm in his physiognomy, we were
both equally impressed with his liveliness, and his kind and ready
courtesy. He talked in French with my friend, and with difficulty spoke
a few sentences to me in English. His enunciation was not in the least
affected by the entire want of his upper teeth. The conversation began
on his part by the expression of his rapture at the surrender of the
detachment of French troops under General Humbert. Their proceedings in
Ireland with regard to the committee which they had appointed, with the
rest of their organizing system, seemed to have given the poet great
entertainment. He then declared his sanguine belief in Nelson's victory,
and anticipated its confirmation with a keen and triumphant pleasure.
His words, tones, looks, implied the most vehement Anti-Gallicanism. The
subject changed to literature, and I inquired in Latin concerning the
history of German poetry and the elder German poets. To my great
astonishment he confessed, that he knew very little on the subject. He
had indeed occasionally read one or two of their elder writers, but not
so as to enable him to speak of their merits. Professor Ebeling, he
said, would probably give me every information of this kind: the subject
had not particularly excited his curiosity. He then talked of Milton and
Glover, and thought Glover's blank verse superiour to Milton's.[226]

[226] _Leonidus_, an epic poem, by R. Glover, first appeared in May,
1737: in the fifth edition, published in 1770, it was corrected and
extended from nine books to twelve. Glover was the author of Boadicea
and Medea, tragedies, which had some success on the stage. I believe
that _Leonidas_ has more merit in the conduct of the design, and in the
delineation of character, than as poetry.

'He write an epic poem,' said Thomson, 'who never saw a mountain!'
Glover had seen the sun and moon, yet he seems to have looked for their
poetical aspects in Homer and Milton, rather than in the sky. 'There is
not a single simile in _Leonidas_,' says Lyttleton, 'that is borrowed
from any of the ancients, and yet there is hardly any poem that has such
a variety of beautiful comparisons.' The similes of Milton come so flat
and dry out of Glover's mangle, that they are indeed quite _another
thing_ from what they appear in the poems of that Immortal: _ex. gr._

     Like wintry clouds, which, opening for a time,
     Tinge their black folds with gleams of scattered light:--

Is not this Milton's 'silver lining' stretched and mangled?

    The Queen of Night
    Gleam'd from the centre of th' etherial vault,
    And o'er the raven plumes of darkness shed
    Her placid light.

This is flattened from the well-known passage in Comus.

    Soon will savage Mars
    Deform the lovely _ringlets of thy shrubs_.

A genteel improvement upon Milton's 'bush with frizzled hair implicit.'
Then we have

    --delicious to the sight
    Soft dales meand'ring show their flowery laps
    Among rude piles of nature,

spoiled from

    --the flowery lap
    Of some irriguous valley spread its store.

Thus does this poet shatter and dissolve the blooming sprays of another
man's plantation, instead of pushing through them some new shoots of his
own to crown them with fresh blossoms.

Milton himself borrowed as much as Glover. Aye, ten times more; yet
every passage in his poetry is Miltonic,--more than anything else. On
the other hand, his imitators _Miltonize_, yet produce nothing worthy of
Milton, the important characteristic of whose writings my father well
expressed, when he said 'The reader of Milton must be always on his
duty: _he is surrounded with sense_.' A man must have his sense to
imitate him worthily. How we look through his words at the Deluge, as he
floods it upon us in Book xi. l. 738-53!--The Attic bees produce honey
so flavoured with the thyme of Hymettus that it is scarcely eatable,
though to smell the herb itself in a breezy walk upon that celebrated
Mount would be an exceeding pleasure; thus certain epic poems are
overpoweringly flavoured with herbs of Milton, while yet the fragrant
balm and fresh breeze of his poetry is not to be found in them. S.C.

W---- and myself expressed our surprise: and my friend gave his
definition and notion of harmonious verse, that it consisted, (the
English iambic blank verse above all,) in the apt arrangement of pauses
and cadences, and the sweep of whole paragraphs,

    ----'with many a winding bout
    Of linked sweetness long drawn out,'

and not in the even flow, much less in the prominence or antithetic
vigour, of single lines, which were indeed injurious to the total
effect, except where they were introduced for some specific purpose.
Klopstock assented, and said that he meant to confine Glover's
superiority to single lines.[227]

[227] The 'abrupt and laconic structure' of Glover's periods appears at
the very commencement of _Leonidas_, which has something military in its
movement, but rather the stiff gait of the drilled soldier than the
proud march of the martial hero.

     The virtuous Spartan who resign'd his life
     To save his country at th' Oetaen straits,
     Thermopylae, when all the peopled east
     In arms with Xerxes filled the Grecian plains,
     O Muse record! The Hellespont they passed
     O'erpowering Thrace. The dreadful tidings swift
     To Corinth flew. Her Isthmus was the seat
     Of Grecian council. Orpheus thence returns
     To Lacedaemon. In assembly full, &c.

Glover's best passages are of a soft character. This is a pleasing
_Homerism_:

                                 Lycis dies,
     For boist'rous war ill-chosen. He was skill'd
     To tune the lulling flute, and melt the heart;
     Or with his pipe's awak'ning strains allure
     The lovely dames of Lydia to the dance.
     They on the verdant level graceful mov'd
     In vary'd measures; while the cooling breeze
     Beneath their swelling garments wanton'd o'er
     Their snowy breasts, and smooth Cayster's streams
     Soft-gliding murmur'd by. The hostile blade, &c.    Bk. VIII.

And here is a pleasing expansion of Pindar, Olymp. II. 109:

                          Placid were his days,
     Which flow'd through blessings. As a river pure,
     Whose sides are flowery, and whose meadows fair,
     Meets in his course a subterranean void;
     There dips his silver head, again to rise,
     And, rising, glide through flow'rs and meadows new;
     So shall Oïleus in those happier fields,
     Where never tempests roar, nor humid clouds
     In mists dissolve, nor white descending flakes
     Of winter violate th' eternal green;
     Where never gloom of trouble shades the mind,
     Nor gust of passion heaves the quiet breast,
     Nor dews of grief are sprinkled.     Bk. X. S.C.


He told us that he had read Milton, in a prose translation, when he was
fourteen.[228] I understood him thus myself, and W--- interpreted
Klopstock's French as I had already construed it. He appeared to know
very little of Milton or indeed of our poets in general. He spoke with
great indignation of the English prose translation of his MESSIAH. All
the translations had been bad, very bad--but the English was _no_
translation--there were pages on pages not in the original: and half the
original was not to be found in the translation. W--- told him that I
intended to translate a few of his odes as specimens of German
lyrics--he then said to me in English, 'I wish you would render into
English some select passages of THE MESSIAH, and _revenge_ me of your
countryman!'



[228] This was accidentally confirmed to me by an old German gentleman
at Helmstadt, who had been Klopstock's school and bed-fellow. Among
other boyish anecdotes, he related that the young poet set a particular
value on a translation of the PARADISE LOST, and always slept with it
under his pillow.

It was the liveliest thing which he produced in the whole conversation.
He told us, that his first ode was fifty years older than his last. I
looked at him with much emotion--I considered him as the venerable
father of German poetry; as a good man as a Christian; seventy-four
years old; with legs enormously swollen; yet active, lively, cheerful,
and kind, and communicative. My eyes felt as if a tear were swelling
into them. In the portrait of Lessing there was a toupee periwig, which
enormously injured the effect of his physiognomy--Klopstock wore the
same, powdered and frizzled. By the bye, old men ought never to wear
powder--the contrast between a large snow-white wig and the colour of an
old man's skin is disgusting, and wrinkles in such a neighbourhood
appear only channels for dirt. It is an honour to poets and great men,
that you think of them as parts of Nature; and anything of trick and
fashion wounds you in them, as much as when you see venerable yews
clipped into miserable peacocks.--The author of THE MESSIAH should have
worn his own grey hair.--His powder and periwig were to the eye what
_Mr_. Virgil would be to the ear.

Klopstock dwelt much on the superiour power which the German language
possessed of concentrating meaning. He said, he had often translated
parts of Homer and Virgil, line by line, and a German line proved always
sufficient for a Greek or Latin one. In English you cannot do this. I
answered, that in English we could commonly render one Greek heroic line
in a line and a half of our common heroic metre, and I conjectured that
this line and a half would be found to contain no more syllables than
one German or Greek hexameter. He did not understand me:[229] and I, who
wished to hear his opinions, not to correct them, was glad that he did
not.

[229] Klopstock's observation was partly true and partly erroneous. In
the literal sense of his words, and, if we confine the comparison to the
average of space required for the expression of the same thought in the
two languages, it is erroneous. I have translated some German hexameters
into English hexameters, and find, that on the average three English
lines will express four lines German. The reason is evident: our
language abounds in monosyllables and dissyllables. The German, not less
than the Greek, is a polysyllable language. But in another point of view
the remark was not without foundation. For the German possessing the
same unlimited privilege of forming compounds, both with prepositions
and with epithets, as the Greek, it can express the richest single Greek
word in a single German one, and is thus freed from the necessity of
weak or ungraceful paraphrases. I will content myself with one example
at present, viz. the use of the prefixed participles _ver_, _zer_,
_ent_, and _weg_: thus _reissen_ to rend, _verreissen_ to rend away,
_zerreissen_ to rend to pieces, _entreissen_ to rend off or out of a
thing, in the active sense: or _schmelzen_ to melt--_ver_, _zer_, _ent_,
_schmelzen_--and in like manner through all the verbs neuter and active.
If you consider only how much we should feel the loss of the prefix
_be_, as in bedropt, besprinkle, besot, especially in our poetical
language, and then think that this same mode of composition is carried
through all their simple and compound prepositions, and many of their
adverbs; and that with most of these the Germans have the same privilege
as we have of dividing them from the verb and placing them at the end of
the sentence; you will have no difficulty in comprehending the reality
and the cause of this superior power in the German of condensing
meaning, in which its great poet exulted. It is impossible to read half
a dozen pages of Wieland without perceiving that in this respect the
German has no rival but the Greek. And yet I feel, that concentration or
condensation is not the happiest mode of expressing this excellence,
which seems to consist not so much in the less time required for
conveying an impression, as in the unity and simultaneousness with which
the impression is conveyed. It tends to make their language more
picturesque: it _depictures_ images better. We have obtained this power
in part by our compound verbs derived from the Latin: and the sense of
its great effect no doubt induced our Milton both to the use and the
abuse of Latin derivatives. But still these prefixed particles,
conveying no separate or separable meaning to the mere English reader,
cannot possibly act on the mind with the force or liveliness of an
original and homogeneous language such as the German is, and besides are
confined to certain words.

We now took our leave. At the beginning of the French Revolution
Klopstock wrote odes of congratulation. He received some honorary
presents from the French Republic, (a golden crown I believe,) and, like
our Priestley, was invited to a seat in the legislature, which he
declined. But when French liberty metamorphosed herself into a fury, he
sent back these presents with a _palinodia_, declaring his abhorrence of
their proceedings: and since then he has been perhaps more than enough
an Anti-Gallican. I mean, that in his just contempt and detestation of
the crimes and follies of the Revolutionists, he suffers himself to
forget that the revolution itself is a process of the Divine Providence;
and that as the folly of men is the wisdom of God, so are their
iniquities instruments of his goodness. From Klopstock's house we walked
to the ramparts, discoursing together on the poet and his conversation,
till our attention was diverted to the beauty and singularity of the
sunset and its effects on the objects around us. There were woods in the
distance. A rich sandy light, (nay, of a much deeper colour than sandy,)
lay over these woods that blackened in the blaze. Over that part of the
woods which lay immediately under the intenser light, a brassy mist
floated. The trees on the ramparts, and the people moving to and fro
between them, were cut or divided into equal segments of deep shade and
brassy light. Had the trees, and the bodies of the men and women, been
divided into equal segments by a rule or pair of compasses, the portions
could not have been more regular. All else was obscure. It was a fairy
scene!--and to increase its romantic character, among the moving
objects, thus divided into alternate shade and brightness, was a
beautiful child, dressed with the elegant simplicity of an English
child, riding on a stately goat, the saddle, bridle, and other
accoutrements of which were in a high degree costly and splendid. Before
I quit the subject of Hamburg, let me say, that I remained a day or two
longer than I otherwise should have done, in order to be present at the
feast of St. Michael, the patron saint of Hamburg, expecting to see the
civic pomp of this commercial Republic. I was however disappointed.
There were no processions, two or three sermons were preached to two or
three old women in two or three churches, and St. Michael and his
patronage wished elsewhere by the higher classes, all places of
entertainment, theatre, &c. being shut up on this day. In Hamburg, there
seems to be no religion at all; in Lubec it is confined to the women.
The men seem determined to be divorced from their wives in the other
world, if they cannot in this. You will not easily conceive a more
singular sight, than is presented by the vast aisle of the principal
church at Lubec seen from the organ-loft: for, being filled with female
servants and persons in the same class of life, and all their caps
having gold and silver cauls, it appears like a rich pavement of gold
and silver.

I will conclude this letter with the mere transcription of notes, which
my friend W---- made of his conversations with Klopstock, during the
interviews that took place after my departure. On these I shall make but
one remark at present, and that will appear a presumptuous one, namely,
that Klopstock's remarks on the venerable sage of Königsburg are to my
own knowledge injurious and mistaken; and so far is it from being true,
that his system is now given up, that throughout the Universities of
Germany there is not a single professor who is not either a Kantean or a
disciple of Fichte, whose system is built on the Kantean, and
presupposes its truth; or lastly who, though an antagonist of Kant, as
to his theoretical work, has not embraced wholly or in part his moral
system, and adopted part of his nomenclature. 'Klopstock having wished
to see the CALVARY of Cumberland, and asked what was thought of it in
England, I went to Remnant's (the English bookseller) where I procured
the Analytical Review, in which is contained the review of Cumberland's
CALVARY. I remembered to have read there some specimens of a blank verse
translation of THE MESSIAH. I had mentioned this to Klopstock, and he
had a great desire to see them. I walked over to his house and put the
book into his hands. On adverting to his own poem, he told me he began
THE MESSIAH when he was seventeen: he devoted three entire years to the
plan without composing a single line. He was greatly at a loss in what
manner to execute his work. There were no successful specimens of
versification in the German language before this time. The first three
cantos he wrote in a species of measured or numerous prose. This, though
done with much labour and some success, was far from satisfying him. He
had composed hexameters both Latin and Greek as a school exercise, and
there had been also in the German language attempts in that style of
versification. These were only of very moderate merit.--One day he was
struck with the idea of what could be done in this way--he kept his room
a whole day, even went without his dinner, and found that in the evening
he had written twenty-three hexameters, versifying a part of what he had
before written in prose. From that time, pleased with his efforts, he
composed no more in prose. To-day he informed me that he had finished
his plan before he read Milton. He was enchanted to see an author who
before him had trod the same path. This is a contradiction of what he
said before. He did not wish to speak of his poem to any one till it was
finished: but some of his friends who had seen what he had finished,
tormented him till he had consented to publish a few books in a journal.
He was then, I believe, very young, about twenty-five. The rest was
printed at different periods, four books at a time. The reception given
to the first specimens was highly flattering. He was nearly thirty years
in finishing the whole poem, but of these thirty years not more than two
were employed in the composition. He only composed in favourable
moments; besides he had other occupations. He values himself upon the
plan of his odes, and accuses the modern lyrical writers of gross
deficiency in this respect. I laid the same accusation against Horace:
he would not hear of it--but waived the discussion. He called
Rousseau's ODE TO FORTUNE a moral dissertation in stanzas.[230] I spoke
of Dryden's ST. CECILIA; but be did not seem familiar with our writers.
He wished to know the distinctions between our dramatic and epic blank
verse.

[230] (A la Fortune. Liv. II. Ode vi. Oeuvres de Jean Baptiste Rousseau,
p.121, edit. 1820. One of the latter strophes of this ode concludes with
two lines, which, as the editor observes, have become a proverb, and of
which the thought and expression are borrowed from Lucretius: _cripitur
persona, manet res:_ III. v. 58.

     Montrez nous, guerriers magnanimes,
     Votre vertu dans tout son jour:
     Voyons comment vos coeurs sublimes
     Du sort soutiendront le retour.
     Tant que sa faveur vous seconde,
     Vous étes les maîtres du monde,
     Votre gloire nous éblouit:
     Mais au moindre revers funeste,
     _Le masque tombe, l'homme reste,
     Et le heros s'évanouit_.

Horace, says the Editor, en traitant ce même sujet, liv. X. ode XXXV. et
Pindare en l'esquissant à grands traits, au commencement de sa douzième
Olympique, n'avoient laissé à leurs successeurs que son côté moral à
envisager, et c'est le parti que prit Rousseau. The general sentiment of
the ode is handled with great dignity in Paradise Regained. Bk. III. l.
43--157--a passage which, as Thyer says, contains the quintessence of
the subject. Dante has some noble lines on Fortune in the viith canto of
the _Inferno_,--lines worthy of a great mystic poet. After referring to
the vain complaints and maledictions of men against this Power, he
beautifully concludes:

     Ma ella s'è beata e ciò non ode:
     Con l'altre prime creature lieta
     _Volve sua spera, e beata si gode_.

J.B. Rousseau was born in 1669, began his career at the close of the age
of Louis Quatorze, died at Brussels, March 17, 1741. He had been
banished from France, by an intrigue, on a false charge, as now seems
clear, of having composed and distributed defamatory verses, in 1712;
and it was engraved upon his tomb that he was 'thirty years an object of
envy and thirty of compassion.' Belonging to the classical school of the
17th century, of which he was the last survivor, he came somewhat into
conflict with the spirit of the 18th, which was preparing a new vintage,
and would have none but new wine in new bottles. Rousseau, however, was
a very finished writer in his way, and has been compared to Pindar,
Horace, Anacreon and Malherbe. His ode to _M. le Comte du Luc_ is as
fine an example as I know of the modern classical style. This is quite
different from that which is exemplified in Wordsworth's Laodamia and
Serjeant Talfourd's Ion; for in them the subjects only are ancient,
while both the form and spirit are modern; whereas in the odes of
Rousseau a modern subject is treated, as far as difference of times and
language will allow, in the manner and tone of the Ancients. Samson
Agonistes and Goethe's Iphigenia in Tauris are conformed to ancient
modes of thought, but in them the subject also is taken from antiquity.
Rousseau's works consist of Odes, Epistles in verse, Cantatas, Epigrams,
&c. &c. He wrote for the stage at the beginning of his literary life,
but with no great success. S.C.)

He recommended me to read his HERMANN before I read either THE MESSIAH
or the odes. He flattered himself that some time or other his dramatic
poems would be known in England. He had not heard of Cowper. He thought
that Voss in his translation of THE ILIAD had done violence to the idiom
of the Germans, and had sacrificed it to the Greeks, not remembering
sufficiently that each language has its particular spirit and
genius.[231] He said Lessing was the first of their dramatic writers. I
complained of NATHAN as tedious. He said there was not enough of action
in it; but that Lessing was the most chaste of their writers. He spoke
favourably of Goethe; but said that his SORROWS OF WERTER was his best
work, better than any of his dramas: he preferred the first written to
the rest of Goethe's dramas. Schiller's ROBBERS he found so extravagant,
that he could not read it. I spoke of the scene of the setting sun.[232]
He did not know it. He said Schiller could not live. He thought DON
CARLOS the best of his dramas; but said that the plot was
inextricable.--It was evident he knew little of Schiller's works:
indeed, he said, he could not read them. Bürger, he said, was a true
poet, and would live; that Schiller, on the contrary, must soon be
forgotten; that he gave himself up to the imitation of Shakespeare, who
often was extravagant, but that Schiller was ten thousand times more
so.[233]

[231] Voss, who lived from Feb. 20, 1751, to March, 1826, was author of
the Luise, 'a rural epopaea of simple structure divided into three
idyls, which relate the betrothment and marriage of the heroine.' This
is a pleasing and very peculiar poem, composed in hexameter verse. 'The
charm of the narrative,' says Mr. T., 'consists in the minute
description of the local domestic manners of the personages.' The charm
consists, I think, in the blending of these manners with the beauty of
Nature, and the ease and suitability of the versification. Voss's
translation of the Odyssey is praised for being so perfect an imitation
of the original. The Greek has been rendered, 'with a fidelity and
imitative harmony so admirable, that it suggests to the scholar the
original wording, and reflects, as from a mirror, every beauty and every
blemish of the ancient poem.' Hist. Survey, pp. 61-68. S. C.

[232] Act III. Sc. 2. The night scene, which is the 5th of Act iv, is
fine too in a frantic way. The songs it contains are very spirited. That
sung by the Robbers is worthy of a Thug; it goes beyond our notions of
any European bandit, and transports us to the land of Jaggernat. S. C.

[233] The works of Bürger, who was born on the first day of 1748, died
June 8, 1794, consist of Poems (2 vols.), Macbeth altered from
Shakespeare, (pronounced by Taylor,--no good judge of _Shakespeare_,--in
some respects superiour to the original,) Munchaüsen's Travels;
Translations; (of the six first books of the Iliad, and some others);
Papers philological and political. His fame rests chiefly on three
ballads, The Wild Hunter, The Parson's Daughter, and Lenore. The
powerful diction and admirable harmony,--rhythm, sound, rhyme of these
compositions Mr. Taylor describes as the result of laborious art; it
strikes me, from the outline which he has given of Bürger's history,
that the violent feelings, the life-like expression of which constitutes
their power and value, may have been partly the reflex of the poet's own
mind. His seems to have been a life of mismanagement from youth till
middle age. Like Milton, he lost a beloved second wife by childbed in
the first year of marriage: like him, he married a third time, but
without his special necessity--blindness and unkind daughters. He wedded
a lady who had fallen in love with his poetry, or perhaps his poetical
reputation: an union founded, as it appears, in vanity, ended in
vexation of spirit: and as Death, which had deprived him of two wives,
did not release him from a third, he obtained his freedom, at the end of
little more than three years, from a court of justice. Why did Klopstock
undervalue, by preference of such a poet, the lofty-minded Schiller--the
dearest to England of all German bards; perhaps because the author of
Wallenstein was a philosopher, and had many things in his philosophy
which the author of The Messiah could not find in _his_ heaven and
earth. S.C.

He spoke very slightingly of Kotzebue, as an immoral author in the
first place, and next, as deficient in power. At Vienna, said he, they
are transported with him; but we do not reckon the people of Vienna
either the wisest or the wittiest people of Germany. He said Wieland was
a charming author, and a sovereign master of his own language: that in
this respect Goethe could not be compared to him, nor indeed could any
body else. He said that his fault was to be fertile to exuberance. I
told him the OBERON had just been translated into English. He asked me
if I was not delighted with the poem. I answered, that I thought the
story began to flag about the seventh or eighth book; and observed, that
it was unworthy of a man of genius to make the interest of a long poem
turn entirely upon animal gratification. He seemed at first disposed to
excuse this by saying, that there are different subjects for poetry, and
that poets are not willing to be restricted in their choice. I answered,
that I thought the _passion_ of love as well suited to the purposes of
poetry as any other passion; but that it was a cheap way of pleasing to
fix the attention of the reader through a long poem on the mere
_appetite_. Well! but, said he, you see, that such poems please every
body. I answered, that it was the province of a great poet to raise
people up to his own level, not to descend to theirs. He agreed, and
confessed, that on no account whatsoever would he have written a work
like the OBERON. He spoke in raptures of Wieland's style, and pointed
out the passage where Retzia is delivered of her child, as exquisitely
beautiful.[234]



[234] Oberon, Canto viii. stanzas 69-80. The little touch about the new
born babe's returning its mother's kiss is very romantic: though put
modestly in the form of a query:

         --Und scheint nicht jeden Kuss
     Sein kleiner mund dem ihren zu entsaugen?

The word _entsaugen (suck off)_ is expressive--it very naturally
characterises the kiss of an infant five minutes of age. Wieland had
great nursery experience. 'My sweetest hours,' says he, in a letter
quoted in the Survey,' are those in which I see about me, in all their
glee of childhood, my whole posse of little half-way things between apes
and angels.'

Mr. Sotheby's translation of the Oberon made the poem popular in this
country. The original first appeared in 1780. S. C.

I said that I did not perceive any very striking passages; but that I
made allowance for the imperfections of a translation. Of the thefts of
Wieland, he said, they were so exquisitely managed, that the greatest
writers might be proud to steal as he did. He considered the books and
fables of old romance writers in the light of the ancient mythology, as
a sort of common property, from which a man was free to take whatever he
could make a good use of. An Englishman had presented him with the odes
of Collins, which he had read with pleasure. He knew little or nothing
of Gray, except his ELEGY written in a country CHURCH-YARD. He
complained of the fool in LEAR. I observed that he seemed to give a
terrible wildness to the distress; but still he complained. He asked
whether it was not allowed, that Pope had written rhymed poetry with
more skill than any of our writers--I said I preferred Dryden, because
his couplets had greater variety in their movement. He thought my reason
a good one; but asked whether the rhyme of Pope were not more exact.
This question I understood as applying to the final terminations, and
observed to him that I believed it was the case; but that I thought it
was easy to excuse some inaccuracy in the final sounds, if the general
sweep of the verse was superiour. I told him that we were not so exact
with regard to the final endings of lines as the French. He did not seem
to know that we made no distinction between masculine and feminine (i.e.
single or double,) rhymes: at least he put inquiries to me on this
subject. He seemed to think, that no language could be so far formed as
that it might not be enriched by idioms borrowed from another tongue. I
said this was a very dangerous practice; and added, that I thought
Milton had often injured both his prose and verse by taking this liberty
too frequently. I recommended to him the prose works of Dryden as models
of pure and native English. I was treading upon tender ground, as I have
reason to suppose that he has himself liberally indulged in the
practice.

The same day I dined at Mr. Klopstock's, where I had the pleasure of a
third interview with the poet. We talked principally about indifferent
things. I asked him what he thought of Kant. He said that his reputation
was much on the decline in Germany. That for his own part he was not
surprised to find it so, as the works of Kant were to him utterly
incomprehensible--that he had often been pestered by the Kanteans; but
was rarely in the practice of arguing with them. His custom was to
produce the book, open it and point to a passage, and beg they would
explain it. This they ordinarily attempted to do by substituting their
own ideas. I do not want, I say, an explanation of your own ideas, but
of the passage which is before us. In this way I generally bring the
dispute to an immediate conclusion. He spoke of Wolfe as the first
Metaphysician they had in Germany. Wolfe had followers; but they could
hardly be called a sect, and luckily till the appearance of Kant, about
fifteen years ago, Germany had not been pestered by any sect of
philosophers whatsoever; but that each man had separately pursued his
inquiries uncontrolled by the dogmas of a master. Kant had appeared
ambitious to be the founder of a sect; that he had succeeded: but that
the Germans were now coming to their senses again. That Nicolai and
Engel had in different ways contributed to disenchant the nation;[235]
but above all the incomprehensibility of the philosopher and his
philosophy. He seemed pleased to hear, that as yet Kant's doctrines had
not met with many admirers in England--did not doubt but that we had too
much wisdom to be duped by a writer who set at defiance the common sense
and common understandings of men. We talked of tragedy. He seemed to
rate highly the power of exciting tears--I said that nothing was more
easy than to deluge an audience, that it was done every day by the
meanest writers.'

I must remind you, my friend, first, that these notes are not intended
as specimens of Klopstock's intellectual power, or even '_colloquial
prowess_,' to judge of which by an accidental conversation, and this
with strangers, and those two foreigners, would be not only
unreasonable, but calumnious. Secondly, I attribute little other
interest to the remarks than what is derived from the celebrity of the
person who made them. Lastly, if you ask me, whether I have read THE
MESSIAH, and what I think of it? I answer--as yet the first four books
only: and as to my opinion--(the reasons of which hereafter)--you may
guess it from what I could not help muttering to myself, when the good
pastor this morning told me, that Klopstock was the German Milton----'a
very _German_ Milton indeed!!!'----Heaven preserve you,
and                               S.T. COLERIDGE.

[235] These _disenchanters_ put one in mind of the ratcatchers, who are
said and supposed to rid houses of rats, and yet the rats, somehow or
other, continue to swarm. The Kantean rats were not aware, I believe,
when Klopstock spoke thus, of the extermination that had befallen them:
and even to this day those acute animals infest the old house, and steal
away the daily bread of the children,--if the old notions of Space and
Time, and the old proofs of religious verities by way of the
_understanding_ and _speculative reason,_ must be called such. Whether
or no these are their true spiritual sustenance, or the necessary guard
and vehicle of it, is perhaps a question.

But who were Nicolai and Engel, and what did they against the famous
enchanter? The former was born in 1733, at Berlin, where he carried on
his father's business of book-selling, pursued literature with marked
success, and attained to old age, full of literary honours. By means of
three critical journals (the _Literatur-Briefe,_ the _Bibliothek der
Schönen Wissenschaftern,_ and the _Allgemeine Deutsche Bibliothek,_)
which he conducted with the powerful cooperation of Lessing, and of his
intimate friend Mendelssohn, and to which he contributed largely
himself, he became very considerable in the German world of letters, and
so continued for the space of twenty years. Jördens, in his Lexicon,
speaks highly of the effect of Nicolai's writings in promoting freedom
of thought, enlightened views in theology and philosophy, and a sound
taste in fine literature--describes him as a brave battler with
intolerance, hypocrisy, and confused conceptions in religion; with empty
subtleties, obscurities, and terminologies, that can but issue in vain
fantasies, in his controversial writings on the 'so-named critical
philosophy.' He engaged with the _Kritik der reinen Vernunft,_ on its
appearance in 1781, in the _Allgemeine Deutsche Bibliothek;_ first
explained his objections to it in the 11th vol. of his
_Reisebeschreibung_, (Description of a Journey through Germany and
Switzerland in the year 1781,) and afterwards, in his romance entitled
The Life and Opinions of Sempronius Gundibert, a German Philosopher,
sought to set forth the childish crotchets and abuses imputable to many
disciples of this philosophy in their native absurdity. The _ratsbone_
alluded to by Klopstock, was doubtless contained in the above-named
romance, which the old poet probably esteemed more than Nicolai's more
serious polemics.

Gundibert has had its day, but in a fiction destined to a day of longer
duration,--Goethe's Faust,--the Satirist is himself most effectively
satirised. There he is, in that strange yet beautiful temple, pinned to
the wall in a ridiculous attitude, to be laughed at as long as the
temple itself is visited and admired. This doom came upon him, not so
much for his campaign against the Kanteans, as for his _Joys of
Werter_,--because he had dared to ridicule a book, which certainly
offered no small temptations to the parodist. Indeed he seems to have
been engaged in a series of hostilities with Fichte, Lavater, Wieland,
Herder, and Goethe.

(See Mr. Hayward's excellent translation of Faust, of which I have heard
a literary German say that it gave a better notion of the original than
any other which he had seen.)


In the _Walpurgisnacht_ of the Faust he thus addresses the goblin
dancers:--

     Ihr seyd noch immer da! Nein das ist unerhört!
     Verschwindet doch! Wir haben ja aufgeklärt!

     'Fly! Vanish! Unheard of impudence! What, still there!
     In this enlightened age too, when you have been
     Proved not to exist?'--_Shelley's Translation_.

Do we not see the doughty reviewer before us magisterially waving his
hand and commanding the apparitions to vanish?--then with despondent
astonishment exclaiming:

     Das Teufelspack es fragt nach keiner Regel.
     Wir sind so klug und dennoch spukt's in Tegel.

So wise we are! yet what fantastic fooleries still stream forth from my
contemporary's brains; how are we still haunted! The speech of Faust
concerning him is mis-translated by Shelley, who understood the humour
of the piece, as well as the poetry, but not the particular humours of
it. Nothing can be more expressive of a conceited, narrow-minded
reviewer. 'Oh he!--he is absolutely everywhere,--What others dance, he
must decide upon. If he can't chatter about every step, 'tis as good as
not made at all. _Nothing provokes him so much as when we go forward_.
If you'd turn round and round in a circle, as he does in his old mill,
he'd approve of that perhaps; especially if you'd consult him about it.'

'A man of such spirited habitudes,' says Mr. Carlyle, after affirming
that Nicolai wrote against Kant's philosophy without comprehending it,
and judged of poetry, as of Brunswick Mum, by its utility, 'is now by
the Germans called a _Philister_. Nicolai earned for himself the painful
pre-eminence of being _Erz Philister_, Arch Philistine.' 'He, an old
enemy of Goethe's,' says Mr. Hill, in explanation of the title in which
he appears in the _Walpurgisnacht_, 'had published an account of his
phantasmal illusions, pointing them against Fichte's system of idealism,
which he evidently confounded with what Coleridge would have called
Subjective Idolism.'

Such was this wondrous _disenchanter_ in the eyes of later critics than
Klopstock: a man strong enough to maintain a long fight against genius,
not wise enough to believe in it and befriend it. How many a
controversialist seems a mighty giant to those who are predisposed to
his opinions, while, in the eyes of others, he is but a blind
floundering Polyphemus, who knows not how to direct his heavy blows; if
not a menacing scarecrow, with a stake in his hand, which he has no
power to drive home! I remember reading a thin volume in which all
metaphysicians that had ever left their thoughts behind them were
declared utterly in the wrong--all up to, but not including, the valiant
author himself. The world had lain in darkness till he appeared, like a
new Phoebus, on the scene. This great man despatched Kant's
system--(never having read a syllable of any work of Kant's)--in a page
and a quarter! and the exploit had its celebraters and admirers. Yet
strange to say, the metaphysical world went on just as if nothing had
happened!--after the sun was up, it went groping about, as if it had
never been enlightened, and actually ever since has continued to talk as
if Locke, Berkeley, Hume, Kant, and other metaphysicians understood the
nature of the things they wrote about rather _more_ than the mass of
mankind, instead of _less! Verschwindet doch_! might this author say, as
Nicolai said to the spectres of the Brocken and the phantoms of
literature,

     Verschwindet doch! _Wir haben ja aufgeklärt_.

Engel opposed Kant in philosophical treatises, one of which is entitled
_Zwei Gerpräche den Werth der Kritik betreffend_. He too occupied a
considerable space in Literature--his works fill twelve volumes, besides
a few other pieces. 'To him,' says Jördens, 'the criticism of taste and
of art, speculative, practical, and popular philosophy, owe many of
their later advances in Germany.' Jördens pronounces his romance,
entitled _Lorenz Stark_, a masterpiece in its way, and says of his
plays, that they deserve a place beside the best of Lessing's. He was
the author of a miscellaneous work, entitled The Philosopher for the
World, and is praised by Cousin as a meritorious anthropologist. Engel
was born September 11, 1741, at Parchim, of which his father was pastor,
in Mecklenburg-Schwerin; died June 28, 1802. Neither Nicolai nor Engel
is noticed by Cousin among the adversaries of Kant's doctrine: the
intelligent adversaries,--who assailed it with skill and knowledge,
rather proved its strength than discovered its weakness. _Fortius acri
ridiculum_; but this applies only to transient triumphs, where the
object of attack, though it furnishes _occasion_ for ridicule, affords
no just _cause_ for it. S.C.

       *       *       *       *       *


(_b_) PERSONAL REMINISCENCES (1836), BY THE HON. MR. JUSTICE COLERIDGE.

In the summer of 1836 I went on the Northern Circuit with Baron Parke.
We took Bowness and Storrs, in our way from Appleby to Lancaster; and I
visited Wordsworth, and my dear friend Arnold from Storrs. It was my
fortune to have to try the great Hornby Castle cause, as it was called;
this I did at the end of the circuit, returning from Liverpool to
Lancaster for the purpose. Arnold was kind enough to lend me his house
(Foxhow) for the vacation; and when the circuit ended, my wife and
children accompanied me to it, and we remained there six weeks. During
that time Mr. and Mrs. Wordsworth were our only neighbours, and we
scarcely saw any one besides; but we needed no other addition to the
lovely and loveable country in which we were. He was extremely kind,
both in telling us where to go, and very often going with us. He was
engaged in correcting the press for a new edition of his poems. The
London post, I think, went out at 2 P.M., and then, he would say, he was
at our service. A walk with him in that country was a real treat: I
never met with a man who seemed to know a country and the people so
well, or to love them better, nor one who had such exquisite taste for
rural scenery: he had evidently cultivated it with great care; he not
only admired the beauties, but he could tell you what were the peculiar
features in each scene, or what the incidents to which it owed its
peculiar charm. He combined, beyond any man with whom I ever met, the
unsophisticated poetic delight in the beauties of nature with a somewhat
artistic skill in developing the sources and conditions of them. In
examining the parts of a landscape he would be minute; and he dealt with
shrubs, flower-beds, and lawns with the readiness of a practiced
landscape-gardener. His own little grounds afforded a beautiful specimen
of his skill in this latter respect; and it was curious to see how he
had imparted the same faculty in some measure to his gardener--James
Dixon, I think, was his name. I found them together one morning in the
little lawn by the Mount. 'James and I,' said he, 'are in a puzzle here.
The grass here has spots which offend the eye; and I told him we must
cover them with soap-lees. "That," he says, "will make the green there
darker than the rest." "Then," I said, "we must cover the whole." He
objected: "That will not do with reference to the little lawn to which
you pass from this." "Cover that," I said. To which he replies, "You
will have an unpleasant contrast with the foliage surrounding it."'

Beside this warm feeling and exquisite taste, which made him so
delightful a guide, his favourite spots had a human interest engrafted
on them,--some tradition, some incident, some connection with his own
poetry, or himself, or some dear friend. These he brought out in a
striking way. Apart from these, he was well pleased to discourse on
poetry or poets; and here appeared to me to be his principal
scholarship. He was extremely well read in English poetry; and he would
in his walk review a poem or a poet with admirable precision and
fairness. He did not intrude his own poetry or himself, but he did not
decline to talk about either; and he spoke of both simply, unboastingly,
and yet with a manly consciousness of their worth. It was clear he
thought he had achieved a high place among poets: it had been the aim of
his life, humanly speaking; and he had taken worthy pains to accomplish
and prepare himself for the enterprise. He never would sacrifice
anything he thought right on reflection, merely to secure present
popularity, or avert criticism which he thought unfounded; but he was a
severe critic on himself, and would not leave a line or an expression
with which he was dissatisfied until he had brought it to what he liked.
He thought this due to the gift of poetry and the character of the poet.
Carelessness in the finish of composition he seemed to look on almost as
an offence. I remember well, that after speaking with love and delight
of a very popular volume of poetry, he yet found great fault with the
want of correctness and finish. Reciting one of the poems, and pointing
out inaccuracies in it, he said, 'I like the volume so much, that, if I
was the author, I think I should never rest till I had nearly rewritten
it.' No doubt he carried this in his own case to excess, when he
corrected so largely, in the decline of life, poems written in early
manhood, under a state of feelings and powers which it was impossible to
reproduce, and yet which was necessary, generally speaking, for
successful alteration. I cannot but agree with many who think that on
this account the earlier copies of his poems are more valuable than the
later.

1836. _September_. Wednesday 21.--Wordsworth and I started in my
carriage for Lowther, crossed Kirkstone to Paterdale, by Ulleswater,
going through the Glenridding Walks,[236] and calling at Hallsteads. We
reached the castle time enough before dinner for him to give me a walk.

[236] I remember well, asking him if we were not trespassing on private
pleasure-grounds here. He said, no; the walks had, indeed, been
inclosed, but he remembered them open to the public, and he always went
through them when he chose. At Lowther, we found among the visitors, the
late Lord W----; and describing our walk, _he_ made the same
observation, that we had been trespassing; but Wordsworth maintained his
point with somewhat more warmth than I either liked, or could well
account for. But afterwards, when we were alone, he told me he had
purposely answered Lord W---- stoutly and warmly, because he had done a
similar thing with regard to some grounds in the neighbourhood of
Penrith, and excluded the people of Penrith from walking where they had
always enjoyed the right before. He had evidently a pleasure in
vindicating these rights, and seemed to think it a duty. J.T.C.

After luncheon, on Thursday 22d, we had an open carriage, and proceeded
to Haweswater. It is a fine lake, entirely unspoilt by bad taste. On one
side the bank rises high and steep, and is well clothed with wood; on
the other it is bare and more sloping. Wordsworth conveyed a personal
interest in it to me, by telling me that it was the first lake which my
uncle[237] had seen on his coming into this country: he was in company
with Wordsworth and his brother John. Wordsworth pointed out to me
somewhere about the spot on the hill-side, a little out of the track,
from which they first saw the lake; and said, he well remembered how his
face brightened, and how much delight he appeared to feel. Yesterday
morning we returned to this place. We called on our way and took our
luncheon at Hallsteads, and also called at Paterdale Hall. At both it
was gratifying to see the cordial manner of W.'s reception: he seemed
loved and honoured; and his manner was of easy, hearty, kindness to
them.

[237] See _Memoirs_, vol. i. pp. 147-8.

My tour with him was very agreeable, and I wish I could preserve in my
memory more of his conversation than I shall be able to do. I was
anxious to get from him anecdotes of himself and my uncle, and of their
works. He told me of himself, that his first verses were a Popian copy
written at school on the 'Pleasure of Change;' then he wrote another on
the 'Second Centenary of the School's Foundation;' that he had written
these verses on the holidays, and on the return to school; that he was
rather the poet of the school. The first verses from which he remembered
to have received great pleasure, were Miss Carter's 'Poem on Spring,' a
poem in the six-line stanza, which he was particularly fond of, and had
composed much in, for example, 'Ruth.' He said there was some foundation
in fact, however slight, for every poem he had written of a narrative
kind; so slight indeed, sometimes, as hardly to deserve the name; for
example, 'The Somnambulist' was wholly built on the fact of a girl at
Lyulph's Tower being a sleep-walker; and 'The Water Lily,' on a ship
bearing that name. 'Michael' was founded on the son of an old couple
having become dissolute and run away from his parents; and on an old
shepherd having been seven years in building up a sheepfold in a
solitary valley: 'The Brothers,' on a young shepherd, in his sleep,
having fallen down a crag, his staff remaining suspended midway. Many
incidents he seemed to have drawn from the narration of Mrs. Wordsworth,
or his sister, 'Ellen' for example, in 'The Excursion;' and they must
have told their stories well, for he said his principle had been to give
the oral part as nearly as he could in the very words of the speakers,
where he narrated a real story, dropping, of course, all vulgarisms or
provincialisms, and borrowing sometimes a Bible turn of expression:
these former were mere accidents, not essential to the truth in
representing how the human heart and passions worked; and to give these
last faithfully was his object. If he was to have any name hereafter,
his hope was on this, and he did think he had in some instances
succeeded;[238] that the sale of his poems increased among the classes
below the middle; and he had had, constantly, statements made to him of
the effect produced in reading 'Michael' and other such of his poems. I
added my testimony of being unable to read it aloud without interruption
from my own feelings. 'She was a phantom of delight' he said was written
on 'his dear wife,' of whom he spoke in the sweetest manner; a manner
full of the warmest love and admiration, yet with delicacy and reserve.
He very much and repeatedly regretted that my uncle had written so
little verse; he thought him so eminently qualified, by his very nice
ear, his great skill in metre, and his wonderful power and happiness of
expression. He attributed, in part, his writing so little, to the
extreme care and labour which he applied in elaborating his metres. He
said, that when he was intent on a new experiment in metre, the time and
labour he bestowed were inconceivable; that he was quite an epicure in
sound. Latterly he thought he had so much acquired the habit of
analysing his feelings, and making them matter for a theory or argument,
that he had rather dimmed his delight in the beauties of nature and
injured his poetical powers. He said he had no idea how 'Christabelle'
was to have been finished, and he did not think my uncle had ever
conceived, in his own mind, any definite plan for it; that the poem had
been composed while they were in habits of daily intercourse, and almost
in his presence, and when there was the most unreserved intercourse
between them as to all their literary projects and productions, and he
had never heard from him any plan for finishing it. Not that he doubted
my uncle's _sincerity_ in his subsequent assertions to the contrary;
because, he said, schemes of this sort passed rapidly and vividly
through his mind, and so impressed him, that he often fancied he had
arranged things, which really and upon trial proved to be mere embryos.
I omitted to ask him, what seems obvious enough now, whether, in
conversing about it, he had never asked my uncle how it would end. The
answer would have settled the question. He regretted that the story had
not been made to end the same night in which it begun. There was
difficulty and danger in bringing such a personage as the witch to the
daylight, and the breakfast-table; and unless the poem was to have been
long enough to give time for creating a second interest, there was a
great probability of the conclusion being flat after such a
commencement.

[238] You could not walk with him a mile without seeing what a loving
interest he took in the play and working of simple natures. As you
ascend Kirkstone from Paterdale, you have a bright stream leaping down
from rock to rock, on your right, with here and there silent pools. One
of Wordsworth's poor neighbours worked all the week over Kirkstone, I
think in some mines; and returning on Saturday evenings, used to fish up
this little stream. We met him with a string of small trout. W. offered
to buy them, and bid him take them to the Mount. 'Nay,' said the man, 'I
cannot sell them, Sir; the little children at home look for them for
supper, and I can't disappoint them.' It was quite pleasant to see how
the man's answer delighted the Poet. J.T.C.

       *       *       *       *       *

A great number of my uncle's sonnets, he said, were written from the
'Cat and Salutation,' or a public-house with some such name, in
Smithfield, where my uncle imprisoned himself for some time; and they
appeared in a newspaper, I think he said the _Morning Chronicle_.

He remembered his writing a great part of the translation of
'Wallenstein,' and he said there was nothing more astonishing than the
ease and rapidity with which it was done.

_Sept. 29th, Foxhow_.--We are just setting out, in a promising day, for
a second trip to Keswick, intending, if possible, to penetrate into
Wastdale, over the Sty Head. Before I go, I wish to commemorate a walk
with the Poet, on a drizzly muddy day, the turf sponging out water at
every step, through which he stalked as regardless as if he were of
iron, and with the same fearless, unchanged pace over rough and smooth,
slippery and sound. We went up by the old road[239] from Ambleside to
Keswick, and struck off from the table-land on the left, over the fell
ground, till he brought me out on a crag, bounded, as it were, by two
ascents, and showing me in front, as in a frame, Grasmere Lake, 'the one
green island,' the church, village, &c., and the surrounding mountains.
It is a lovely scene, strikingly described in his verses beginning,

    'When to the attractions of the busy world,
    Preferring studious leisure,' &c.[240]

_Oct. 7th_.--Yesterday Wordsworth drove me to Low-wovel; and then we
ascended a great way towards Kirkstone by Troutbeck, passing by many
interesting cots, barns, and farm-houses, where W. had constantly
something to point out in the architecture, or the fringes of moss,
fern, &c., on the roofs or walls. We crossed the valley, and descended
on Troutbeck Church, whence we came down to the turnpike road, and I
left the Poet, who was going on to assist Sir T. Pasley in laying out
his grounds. I turned homeward, till I met my horse.

       *       *       *       *       *

[239] This old road was very steep, after the fashion of former days,
crossing the hill straight over its highest point. A new cut had been
made, somewhat diminishing the steepness, but still leaving it a very
inconvenient and difficult ascent. At length another alteration was
made, and the road was carried on a level round the foot of the hill. My
friend Arnold pointed these out to me, and, quizzing my politics, said,
the first denoted the old Tory corruption, the second bit by bit, the
third Radical Reform. J.T.C.

[240] See Poems on the naming of Places.

As we walked, I was admiring the never-ceasing sound of water, so
remarkable in this country. 'I was walking,' he said, 'on the mountains,
with ----, the Eastern traveller; it was after rain, and the torrents
were full. I said, "I hope you like your companions--these bounding,
joyous, foaming streams." "No," said the traveller, pompously, "I think
they are not to be compared in delightful effect with the silent
solitude of the Arabian Desert." My mountain blood was up. I quickly
observed that he had boots and a stout great-coat on, and said, "I am
sorry you don't like this; perhaps I can show you what will please you
more." I strode away, and led him from crag to crag, hill to vale, and
vale to hill, for about six hours; till I thought I should have had to
bring him home, he was so tired.'

       *       *       *       *       *

_October 10th_.--I have passed a great many hours to-day with
Wordsworth, in his house. I stumbled on him with proof sheets before
him. He read me nearly all the sweet stanzas written in his copy of the
'Castle of Indolence,'[241] describing himself and my uncle; and he and
Mrs. W. both assured me the description of the latter at that time was
perfectly accurate; that he was almost as a great boy in feelings, and
had all the tricks and fancies there described. Mrs. W. seemed to look
back on him, and those times, with the fondest affection. Then he read
me some lines, which formed part of a suppressed portion of 'The
Waggoner;' but which he is now printing 'on the Rock of Names,' so
called because on it they had carved out their initials:

W.W.    Wm. Wordsworth.
M.H.    Mary W.
D.W.    Dorothy Wordsworth.
S.T.C.    Samuel Taylor Coleridge.
J.W.    John Wordsworth.
S.H.    Sarah Hutchinson.

[241] Poems founded on the Affections.

This rock was about a mile beyond Wythburn Chapel, to which they used to
accompany my uncle, in going to Keswick from Grasmere, and where they
would meet him when he returned. This led him to read much of 'The
Waggoner' to me. It seems a very favourite poem of his, and he read me
splendid descriptions from it. He said his object in it had not been
understood. It was a play of the fancy on a domestic incident and lowly
character: he wished by the opening descriptive lines to put his reader
into the state of mind in which he wished it to be read. If he failed in
doing that, he wished him to lay it down. He pointed out, with the same
view, the glowing lines on the state of exultation in which Ben and his
companions are under the influence of liquor. Then he read the sickening
languor of the morning walk, contrasted with the glorious uprising of
Nature, and the songs of the birds. Here he has added about six most
exquisite lines.

We walked out on the turf terrace, on the Loughrigg side of Rydal Water.
Most exquisitely did the lake and opposite bank look. Thence he led me
home under Loughrigg, through lovely spots I had never seen before. His
conversation was on critical subjects, arising out of his attempts to
alter his poems. He said he considered 'The White Doe' as, in
conception, the highest work he had ever produced. The mere physical
action was all unsuccessful; but the true action of the poem was
spiritual--the subduing of the will, and all inferior passions, to the
perfect purifying and spiritualising of the intellectual nature; while
the Doe, by connection with Emily, is raised as it were from its mere
animal nature into something mysterious and saint-like. He said he
should devote much labour to perfecting the execution of it in the mere
business parts, in which, from anxiety 'to get on' with the more
important parts, he was sensible that imperfections had crept in, which
gave the style a feebleness of character.

He talked of Milton, and observed how he sometimes indulged himself, in
the 'Paradise Lost,' in lines which, if not in time, you could hardly
call verse, instancing,

    'And Tiresias and Phineus, prophets old;'

and then noticed the sweet-flowing lines which followed, and with regard
to which he had no doubt the unmusical line before had been inserted.

'Paradise Regained' he thought the most perfect in _execution_ of
anything written by Milton; that and the 'Merchant of Venice,' in
language, he thought were almost faultless: with the exception of some
little straining in some of the speeches about the caskets, he said,
they were perfect, the genuine English expressions of the ideas of
their own great minds. Thomson he spoke of as a real poet, though it
appeared less in his 'Seasons' than in his other poems. He had wanted
some judicious adviser to correct his taste; but every person he had to
deal with only served to injure it. He had, however, a true love and
feeling for Nature, and a greater share of poetical imagination, as
distinguished from dramatic, than any man between Milton and him. As he
stood looking at Ambleside, seen across the valley, embosomed in wood,
and separated from us at sufficient distance, he quoted from Thomson's
'Hymn on Solitude,' and suggested the addition, or rather insertion, of
a line at the close, where he speaks of glancing at London from Norwood.
The line, he said, should have given something of a more favourable
impression:

'Ambition---- [242] and pleasure vain.'




_October 14th, Foxhow_.--We have had a delightful day to-day. The
weather being fine, Wordsworth agreed to go with us into Easedale; so we
got three ponies, for Mary and Madge, and Fred and Alley, alternately,
and walked from Grasmere, he _trudging_[243] before, with his green
gauze shade over his eyes, and in his plaid jacket and waistcoat. First,
he turned aside at a little farm-house, and took us into a swelling
field, to look down on the tumbling stream which bounded it, and which
we saw precipitated at a distance, in a broad white sheet, from the
mountain. A beautiful water-break of the same stream was before us at
our feet, and he noticed the connection which it formed in the landscape
with the distant waterfall. Then, as he mused for an instant, he said,
'I have often thought what a solemn thing it would be, if we could have
brought to our mind, at once, all the scenes of distress and misery,
which any spot, however beautiful and calm before us, has been witness
to since the beginning. That water-break, with the glassy, quiet pool
beneath it, that looks so lovely, and presents no images to the mind but
of peace,--there, I remember, the only son of his father, a poor man,
who lived yonder, was drowned. He missed him, came to search, and saw
his body dead in the pool.' We pursued our way up the stream, not a very
easy way for the horses, near to the waterfall before mentioned, and so
gradually up to the Tarn. Oh, what a scene! The day one of the softest
and brightest in autumn; the lights various; the mountains in the
richest colouring, fern covering them with reddish gold in great part;
here and there, trees in every variety of autumn foliage; and the rock
itself of a kind of lilac tint; the outlines of the mountains very fine;
the Tarn, which might almost be called a lake for size and abundance of
water, with no culture, or trees, or habitation around it, here and
there a great rock stretching into it like a promontory, and high
mountains surrounding it on three sides, on two of them almost
precipitate; on the fourth side, it is more open, and on this the
stream, crossed by four great stepping-stones, runs out of it, and
descends into Grasmere vale and lake. He pointed out the precipitous
mountain at the head of the Tarn, and told us an incident of his sister
and himself coming from Langdale, which lies on the other side. He
having for some reason parted, she encountered a fog, and was
bewildered. At last, she sat down and waited; in a short time it began
to clear; she could see that a valley was before her. In time, she saw
the backs of cattle feeding, which emerged from the darkness, and at
last the Tarn; and then found she had stopped providentially, and was
sitting nearly on the edge of the precipice. Our return was somewhat
more perilous for the riders than the ascent; but we accomplished it
safely, and, in our return, turned in Butterlip How, a circular, soft,
green hill, surrounded with oak trees, at the head of Grasmere. It is
about twenty acres, and belongs to a London banker, purchased, as I
suppose, with a view to building on it. It is a lovely spot for a house,
with delicious views of the lake and church, Easedale, Helm Crag, &c. I
have seen no place, I think, on which I should so much like to build my
retreat.

[242] I cannot fill the blank. J.T.C.

[243] I used the word _trudging_ at the time; it denoted to me his bold
way of walking. J.T.C.

_October 16th_.--Since church, we have taken our last walk with
Wordsworth. M. was mounted on Dora W.'s pony. He led us up on Loughrigg,
round to the Tarn, by the back of Loughrigg to the foot of Grasmere
Lake, and so home by this side of Rydal; the weather warm and fine, and
a lovely walk it was. The views of the mountains, Langdale Way, the Tarn
itself and its banks, and the views on Grasmere and Rydal Waters, are
almost beyond anything I have seen, even in this country.

He and Mrs. W. came this evening to bid us farewell. We parted with
great, I believe mutual, regret; certainly they have been kind to us in
a way and degree which seemed unequivocally to testify good liking to
us, and them it is impossible not to love. The more I have seen of
Wordsworth, the more I admire him as a poet and as a man. He has the
finest and most discriminating feeling for the beauties of Nature that I
ever witnessed; he expresses himself in glowing and yet manly language
about them. There is much simplicity in his character, much _naïveté_,
but it is all generous and highly moral.[244]

[244] _Memoirs_, ii. 300-15.

       *       *       *       *       *




(_c_) RECOLLECTIONS OF TOUR IN ITALY, BY H.C. ROBINSON.


                   Oct. 18. 1850.

MY DEAR SIR,

I feel quite ashamed, I assure you, of sending you the Itinerary of my
journey with Mr. Wordsworth, so poorly accompanied as it must be, and
the more, because Mr. Wordsworth seems to have thought that I might be
able to make a contribution to your work worth your acceptance. At the
same time, I am much relieved by recollecting that he himself cared
nothing for the connection which a place might have with a great poet,
unless an acquaintance with it served to illustrate his works. He made
this remark in the Church of St. Onofrio at Rome, where Tasso lies
buried. The place which, on this account, interested him more than any
other on the journey was _Vaucluse_, while he cared nothing for Arezzo,
which claims to be the place of Petrarch's birth. Indeed, a priest on
the spot, on another visit, said it is not certain that he was born
there, much less in the house marked with his name. Mr. W. was not
without the _esprit de corps_, even before his official dignity, and
took great interest in Savona, on account of Chiabrera, as appears in
the 'Musings near Aquapendente,' perhaps the most beautiful of these
Memorials of the Italian tour--'alas too few!' As he himself repeatedly
said of the journey, 'It is too late.' 'I have matter for volumes,' he
said once, 'had I but youth to work it up.' It is remarkable how in this
admirable poem meditation predominates over observation. It often
happened that objects of universal attraction served chiefly to bring
back to his mind absent objects dear to him. When we were on that noble
spot, the Amphitheatre at Nismes, I observed his eyes fixed in a
direction where there was the least to be seen; and, looking that way, I
beheld two very young children at play with flowers; and I overheard him
say to himself, 'Oh! you darlings, I wish I could put you in my pocket
and carry you to Rydal Mount.'

It was Mr. Theed, the sculptor, who informed us of the pine tree being
the gift of Sir George Beaumont. This incident occurred within a few
minutes after our walking up the Pincian Hill. And this was the very
first observation Mr. W. made at Rome.

It was a remark justly made on the Memorials of the Swiss Journey in
1820, that Mr. W. left unnoticed the great objects which have given rise
to innumerable common-place verses and huge piles of bad prose, and
which every body talks about, while he dwelt on impressions peculiar to
himself. As a reproach, nothing can be more idle and unmeaning. I
expected it would be so with these latter poems, and so I found it.
There are not more than two others which bring anything to my mind.

The most important of these is the 'Cuckoo at Laverna.' I recollect
perfectly well that I heard the cuckoo at Laverna twice before he heard
it; and that it absolutely fretted him that my ear was first favoured;
and that he exclaimed with delight, 'I hear it! I hear it!' It was at
Laverna, too, that he led me to expect that he had found a subject on
which he would write; and that was the love which birds bore to St.
Francis. He repeated to me a short time afterwards a few lines, which I
do not recollect among those he has written on St. Francis in this poem.
On the journey, one night only I heard him in bed composing verses, and
on the following day I offered to be his amanuensis; but I was not
patient enough, I fear, and he did not employ me a second time. He made
inquiries for St. Francis's biography, as if he would dub him his
Leib-heiliger (body-saint), as Goethe (saying that every one must have
one) declared St. Philip Neri to be his.

The painter monk at Camaldoli also interested him, but he heard my
account only in addition to a _very poor_ exhibition of professional
talent; but he would not allow the pictures to be so very poor, as
every nun ought to be beautiful when she takes the veil.

I recollect, too, the pleasure he expressed when I said to him, 'You are
now sitting in Dante's chair.' It faces the south transept of the
cathedral at Florence.

I have been often asked whether Mr. W. wrote anything on the journey,
and my answer has always been, 'Little or nothing.' Seeds were cast into
the earth, and they took root slowly. This reminds me that I once was
privy to the conception of a sonnet, with a distinctness which did not
once occur on the longer Italian journey. This was when I accompanied
him into the Isle of Man. We had been drinking tea with Mr. and Mrs.
Cookson, and left them when the weather was dull. Very soon after
leaving them we passed the church tower of Bala Sala. The upper part of
the tower had a sort of frieze of yellow lichens. Mr. W. pointed it out
to me, and said, 'It's a perpetual sunshine.' I thought no more of it,
till I read the beautiful sonnet,

    'Broken in fortune, but in mind entire;'[245]

and then I exclaimed, I was present at the conception of this sonnet, at
least of the combination of thought out of which it arose.

I beg to subscribe myself, with sincere esteem,

                   Faithfully yours,
                         H.C. ROBINSON.[246]

[245] See _Memoirs_, ii. 246.

[246] _Ibid._ ii. 329-32.

       *       *       *       *       *

(_d_) REMINISCENCES OF WORDSWORTH.

BY LADY RICHARDSON, AND MRS. DAVY, OF THE OAKS, AMBLESIDE.

(1.) LADY RICHARDSON.

Lancrigg, Easedale, August 26. 1841.

Wordsworth made some striking remarks on Goethe in a walk on the terrace
yesterday. He thinks that the German poet is greatly overrated, both in
this country and his own. He said, 'He does not seem to me to be a great
poet in either of the classes of poets. At the head of the first class I
would place Homer and Shakspeare, whose universal minds are able to
reach every variety of thought and feeling without bringing their own
individuality before the reader. They infuse, they breathe life into
every object they approach, but you never find _themselves_. At the head
of the second class, those whom you can trace individually in all they
write, I would place Spenser and Milton. In all that Spenser writes you
can trace the gentle affectionate spirit of the man; in all that Milton
writes you find the exalted sustained being that he was. Now in what
Goethe writes, who aims to be of the first class, the _universal_, you
find the man himself, the artificial man, where he should not be found;
so consider him a very artificial writer, aiming to be universal, and
yet constantly exposing his individuality, which his character was not
of a kind to dignify. He had not sufficiently clear moral perceptions to
make him anything but an artificial writer.

Tuesday, the 2d of May, Wordsworth and Miss F. came early to walk about
and dine. He was in a very happy kindly mood. We took a walk on the
terrace, and he went as usual to his favourite points. On our return he
was struck with the berries on the holly tree, and said, 'Why should not
you and I go and pull some berries from the other side of the tree,
which is not seen from the window? and then we can go and plant them in
the rocky ground behind the house.' We pulled the berries, and set forth
with our tool. I made the holes, and the Poet put in the berries. He was
as earnest and eager about it, as if it had been a matter of importance;
and as he put the seeds in, he every now and then muttered, in his low
solemn tone, that beautiful verse from Burns's 'Vision:'

    'And wear thou this, she solemn said,
    And bound the holly round my head.
    The polished leaves and berries red
          Did rustling play;
    And like a passing thought she fled
          In light away.'

He clambered to the highest rocks in the 'Tom Intake,' and put in the
berries in such situations as Nature sometimes does with such true and
beautiful effect. He said, 'I like to do this for posterity. Some people
are selfish enough to say, What has posterity done for me? but the past
does much for us.'


(II.) ADDITIONAL SENT TO THE PRESENT EDITOR BY LADY RICHARDSON.

_August 28th_, 1841.--Mr. Wordsworth, Miss Fenwick, and Mrs. Hill came
to dine, and it rained on the whole day, but happily the Poet talked on
from two to eight without being weary, as we certainly were not. After
dinner, when we came to the drawing-room, the conversation turned on the
treatment of Wordsworth by the reviews of the day. I had never heard him
open out on it before, and was much struck with the manner in which he
did it; from his present elevation looking calmly back on the past, and
at the same time feeling that an irreparable injury had been done to him
at the time when life and hope were young. As nearly as I can I shall
record his words as they were spoken. He said:

'At the time I resolved to dedicate myself to poetry and separate myself
from the ordinary lucrative professions, it would certainly have been a
great object to me to have reaped the profits I should have done from my
writings but for the stupidity of Mr. Gifford and the impertinence of
Mr. Jeffrey. It would have enabled me to purchase many books which I
could not obtain, and I should have gone to Italy earlier, which I never
could afford to do until I was sixty-five, when Moxon gave me a thousand
pounds for my writings. This was the only kind of injury Mr. Jeffrey did
me, for I immediately perceived that his mind was of that kind that his
individual opinion on poetry was of no consequence to me whatever, that
it was only by the influence his periodical exercised at the time in
preventing my poems being read and sold that he could injure me; for
feeling that my writings were founded on what was true and spiritual in
human nature, I knew the time would come when they must be known, and I
never therefore felt his opinion of the slightest value, except in
preventing the young of that generation from receiving impressions which
might have been of use to them through life. I say this, I hope not in a
boasting spirit, but I am now daily surprised by receiving letters from
various places at home and abroad expressive of gratitude to me from
persons I never saw or heard of. As this occurs now, I may fairly
conclude that it might have been so when the poems appeared, but for the
tyranny exercised over public opinion by the _Edinburgh_ and _Quarterly
Reviews_.'

_December_ 1841.--Wordsworth and Miss Fenwick spent the shortest day of
the year with us; he brought with him his Epitaph on Southey, and as we
sat round the fire after dinner, my mother asked him to read it to us,
which he did in his usual impressive manner. He asked our impression of
it. My mother ventured to tell him of one word, or rather two, which she
thought might be altered with advantage. They were these:

    'Wide was his range, but ne'er in human breast
    Did private feeling find a holier nest.'

'Holier nest' were the words she objected to, as not being a correct
union of ideas. He took the suggestion most kindly, and said it had been
much discussed in his own mind and in his family circle, but that he saw
the force of what she said, and that he was aware many others would see
it also. He said there was yet time to change it, and that he should
consult Judge Coleridge whether the line, as he once had it,

    'Did private feeling meet in holier rest,'

would not be more appropriate to the simplicity of an epitaph where you
con every word, and where every word is expected to bear an exact
meaning. We all thought this was an improvement. During tea he talked
with great animation of the separation of feeling between the rich and
poor in this country; the reason of this he thinks is the greater
freedom we enjoy; that the line of demarcation not being so clearly laid
down in this country by the law as in others, people fancy they must
make it for themselves. He considers Christianity the only cure for this
state of things. He spoke of his own desire to carry out the feeling of
brotherhood with regard to servants, which he all along endeavoured to
do. He doubted whether he might not have had better servants on a
different system; but he thought it right to endeavour to inspire your
domestics with a feeling of common interest. My mother said she entirely
agreed with him, but she had always found it most difficult.


(III.) LADY RICHARDSON (CONTINUED).

_November_ 1843.--Wordsworth holds the critical power very low,
infinitely lower than the inventive; and he said to-day that if the
quantity of time considered in writing critiques on the works of others
were given to original composition, of whatever kind it might be, it
would be much better employed; it would make a man find out sooner his
own level, and it would do infinitely less mischief. A false or
malicious criticism may do much injury to the minds of others; a stupid
invention, either in prose or verse, is quite harmless.

_December_ 22_d_, 1843.--The shortest day is past, and it was a very
pleasant one to us, for Wordsworth and Miss Fenwick offered to spend it
with us. They came early, and, although it was misty and dingy, he
proposed to walk up Easedale. We went by the terrace, and through the
little gate on the Fell, round by Brimmer Head, having diverged a little
up from Easedale, nearly as far as the ruined cottage. He said, when he
and his sister wandered there so much, that cottage was inhabited by a
man of the name of Benson, a waller, its last inhabitant. He said on the
terrace, 'This is a striking anniversary to me; for this day forty-four
years ago, my sister and I took up our abode at Grasmere, and three days
after we found out this walk, which long remained our favourite haunt.'
There is always something very touching in his way of speaking of his
sister; the tones of his voice become more gentle and solemn, and he
ceases to have that flow of expression which is so remarkable in him on
all other subjects. It is as if the sadness connected with her present
condition was too much for him to dwell upon in connection with the
past, although habit and the 'omnipotence of circumstance' have made its
daily presence less oppressive to his spirits. He said that his sister
spoke constantly of their early days, but more of the years they spent
together in other parts of England than those at Grasmere. As we
proceeded on our walk he happened to speak of the frequent unhappiness
of married persons, and the low and wretched principles on which the
greater number of marriages were formed. He said that unless there was a
strong foundation of love and respect, the 'unavoidable breaks and
cataracts' of domestic life must soon end in mutual aversion, for that
married life ought not to be in theory, and assuredly it never was in
practice, a system of mere submission on either side, but it should be a
system of mutual cooperation for the good of each. If the wife is always
expected to conceal her difference of opinion from her husband, she
ceases to be an equal, and the man loses the advantage which the
marriage tie is intended to provide for him in a civilised and
Christian country. He then went on to say, that, although he never saw
an amiable single woman without wishing that she were married, from his
strong feeling of the happiness of a well-assorted marriage, yet he was
far from thinking that marriage always improved people. It certainly did
not, unless it was a congenial marriage.[247]


(IV.) Mrs. DAVY.

'The Oaks, Ambleside, Monday, Jan. 22. 1844.

While Mrs. Quillinan was sitting with us to-day, Henry Fletcher ran in
to say that he had reserved his summons for Oxford (he had been in
suspense about rooms as an exhibitioner at Balliol), and must be off
within an hour. His young cousins and I went down with him to wait for
the mail in the marketplace. We found Mr. Wordsworth walking about
before the post-office door in very charming mood. His spirits were
excited by the bright morning sunshine, and he entered at once on a full
flow of discourse. He looked very benevolently on Henry as he mounted on
the top of the coach, and seemed quite disposed to give an old man's
blessing to the young man entering on an untried field, and then (nowise
interrupted by the hurrying to and fro of ostlers with their smoking
horses, or passengers with their carpet bags) he launched into a
dissertation, in which there was, I thought, a remarkable union of his
powerful diction, and his practical, thoughtful good sense, on the
subject of college habits, and of his utter distrust of all attempts to
nurse virtue by an avoidance of temptation. He expressed also his entire
want of confidence (from experience he said) of highly-wrought religious
expression in youth. The safest training for the mind in religion he
considered to be a contemplating of the character and personal history
of Christ. 'Work it,' he said, 'into your thoughts, into your
imagination, make it a real presence in the mind.' I was rejoiced to
hear this plain, loving confession of a Christian faith from Wordsworth.
I never heard one more earnest, more as if it came out of a devoutly
believing heart.

[247] The close of Lady Richardson's 'Reminiscences' here in the
_Memoirs_ is not given, as being more fully introduced under December
1841, p. 438. The repetition of the same sentiments in 1843, however, is
noticeable. For a vivid and sweetly toned paper on Wordsworth by Lady
Richardson--based on the _Memoirs_--see _Sharpe's London Magazine_ for
March 1853, pp. 148-55. G.

                      The Oaks, March 5. 1844.

On our way to Lancrigg to-day, we called at Foxhow. We met Mr.
Wordsworth there, and asked him to go with us. It was a beautiful day,
one of his very own 'mild days' of this month. He kindly consented, and
walked with us to meet the carriage at Pelter Bridge. On our drive, he
mentioned, with marked pleasure, a dedication written by Mr. Keble, and
sent to him for his approval, and for his permission to have it prefixed
to Mr. Keble's new volumes of Latin Lectures on Poetry delivered at
Oxford. Mr. Wordsworth said that he had never seen any estimate of his
poetical powers, or more especially of his aims in poetry, that appeared
to him so discriminating and so satisfactory. He considers praise a
perilous and a difficult thing. On this subject he often quotes his
lamented friend, Sir George Beaumont, whom, in his intercourse with men
of genius, literary aspirants, he describes as admirable in the modesty
which he inculcated and practised on this head.

The Oaks, Ambleside, July 11. 1844.

Mr. and Mrs. Wordsworth at dinner, along with our family party. Mr. and
Mrs. Price (from Rugby), two aunts of Mrs. P.'s, and her brother, Mr.
Rose, a young clergyman (a devout admirer of Wordsworth), joined us at
tea. A circle was made as large as our little parlour could hold. Mr.
Price sat next to Mr. Wordsworth, and by design or fortunate accident,
introduced some remark on the powers and the discourse of Coleridge. Mr.
Wordsworth entered heartily and largely on the subject. He said that the
liveliest and truest image he could give of Coleridge's talk was 'that
of a majestic river, the sound or sight of whose course you caught at
intervals, which was sometimes concealed by forests, sometimes lost in
sand, then came flashing out broad and distinct, then again took a turn
which your eye could not follow, yet you knew and felt that it was the
same river: so,' he said, 'there was always a train, a stream, in
Coleridge's discourse, always a connection between its parts in his own
mind, though one not always perceptible to the minds of others.' Mr.
Wordsworth went on to say, that in his opinion Coleridge had been spoilt
as a poet by going to Germany. The bent of his mind, which was at all
times very much to metaphysical theology, had there been fixed in that
direction. 'If it had not been so,' said Wordsworth, 'he would have
been the greatest, the most abiding poet of his age. His very faults
would have made him popular (meaning his sententiousness and laboured
strain), while he had enough of the essentials of a poet to make him
deservedly popular in a higher sense.'

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. Price soon after mentioned a statement of Coleridge's respecting
himself, recorded in his 'Table Talk,' namely, that a visit to the
battle-field of Marathon would raise in him no kindling emotion, and
asked Mr. Wordsworth whether this was true as a token of his mind. At
first Mr. Wordsworth said, 'Oh! that was a mere bravado, for the sake of
astonishing his hearers!' but then, correcting himself, he added, 'And
yet it might in some sense be true, for Coleridge was not under the
influence of external objects. He had extraordinary powers of summoning
up an image or series of images in his own mind, and he might mean that
his idea of Marathon was so vivid, that no visible observation could
make it more so.' 'A remarkable instance of this,' added Mr. Wordsworth,
'is his poem, said to be "composed in the Vale of Chamouni." Now he
never was at Chamouni, or near it, in his life.' Mr. Wordsworth next
gave a somewhat humorous account of the rise and progress of the
'Ancient Mariner.' 'It arose,' he said, 'out of the want of five pounds
which Coleridge and I needed to make a tour together in Devonshire. We
agreed to write jointly a poem, the subject of which Coleridge took from
a dream which a friend of his had once dreamt concerning a person
suffering under a dire curse from the commission of some crime.' 'I,'
said Wordsworth, 'supplied the crime, the shooting of the albatross,
from an incident I had met with in one of Shelvocke's voyages. We tried
the poem conjointly for a day or two, but we pulled different ways, and
only a few lines of it are mine.' From Coleridge, the discourse then
turned to Scotland. Mr. Wordsworth, in his best manner, with earnest
thoughts given out in noble diction, gave his reasons for thinking that
as a poet Scott would not live. 'I don't like,' he said, 'to say all
this, or to take to pieces some of the best reputed passages of Scott's
verse, especially in presence of my wife, because she thinks me too
fastidious; but as a poet Scott _cannot_ live, for he has never in
verse written anything addressed to the immortal part of man. In making
amusing stories in verse, he will be superseded by some newer versifier;
what he writes in the way of natural description is merely rhyming
nonsense.' As a prose writer, Mr. Wordsworth admitted that Scott had
touched a higher vein, because there he had really dealt with feeling
and passion. As historical novels, professing to give the manners of a
past time, he did not attach much value to those works of Scott's so
called, because that he held to be an attempt in which success was
impossible. This led to some remarks on historical writing, from which
it appeared that Mr. Wordsworth has small value for anything but
contemporary history. He laments that Dr. Arnold should have spent so
much of his time and powers in gathering up and putting into imaginary
shape the scattered fragments of the history of Rome.[248]

These scraps of Wordsworth's large, thoughtful, earnest discourse, seem
very meagre as I note them down, and in themselves perhaps hardly worth
preserving and yet this is an evening which those who spent it in his
company will long remember. His venerable head; his simple, natural, and
graceful attitude in his arm-chair; his respectful attention to the
slightest remarks or suggestions of others in relation to what was
spoken of; his kindly benevolence of expression as he looked round now
and then on the circle in our little parlour, all bent to 'devour up his
discourse,' filled up and enlarged the meaning which I fear is but ill
conveyed in the words as they are now set down.


(V.) LADY RICHARDSON: WORDSWORTH'S BIRTH-DAY.

On Tuesday, April the 7th, 1844, my mother[249] and I left Lancrigg to
begin our Yorkshire journey. We arrived at Rydal Mount about three
o'clock, and found the tables all tastefully decorated on the esplanade
in front of the house. The Poet was standing looking at them with a very
pleased expression of face; he received us very kindly, and very soon
the children began to arrive. The Grasmere boys and girls came first,
and took their places on the benches placed round the gravelled part of
the esplanade; their eyes fixed with wonder and admiration on the tables
covered with oranges, gingerbread, and painted eggs, ornamented with
daffodils, laurels, and moss, gracefully intermixed. The plot soon began
to thicken, and the scene soon became very animated. Neighbours, old and
young, of all degrees, ascended to the Mount to keep the Poet's
seventy-fourth birthday, and every face looked friendly and happy. Each
child brought its own mug, and held it out to be filled with tea, in
which ceremony all assisted. Large baskets of currant cakes were handed
round and liberally dispensed; and as each detachment of children had
satisfied themselves with tea and cake, they were moved off, to play at
hide and seek among the evergreens on the grassy part of the Mount. The
day was not bright, but it was soft, and not cold, and the scene, viewed
from the upper windows of the house, was quite beautiful, and one I
should have been very sorry not to have witnessed. It was innocent and
gay, and perfectly natural. Miss F----, the donor of the fête, looked
very happy, and so did all the Poet's household. The children, who
amounted altogether to above 300, gave three cheers to Mr. Wordsworth
and Miss F----. After some singing and dancing, and after the division
of eggs, gingerbread, and oranges had taken place, we all began to
disperse. We spent the night at the Oaks, and set off on our journey the
following morning. The gay scene at the Mount often comes before me, as
a pleasant dream. It is perhaps the only part of the island where such a
reunion of all classes could have taken place without any connection of
landlord and tenant, or any clerical relation, or school direction.
Wordsworth, while looking at the gambols on the Mount, expressed his
conviction that if such meetings could oftener take place between people
of different condition, a much more friendly feeling would be created
than now exists in this country between the rich and poor.

[248] But see _Memorials of Italy_, 'Sonnets on Roman Historians.'

[249] Mrs. Fletcher.

       *       *       *       *       *

_July 12th,_ 1844.--Wordsworth spoke much during the evening of his
early intercourse with Coleridge, on some one observing that it was
difficult to carry away a distinct impression from Coleridge's
conversation, delightful as every one felt his outpourings to be.
Wordsworth agreed, but said he was occasionally very happy in clothing
an idea in words; and he mentioned one which was recorded in his
sister's journal during a tour they all made together in Scotland. They
passed a steam engine, and Wordsworth made some observation to the
effect that it was scarcely possible to divest oneself of the impression
on seeing it that it had life and volition. 'Yes,' replied Coleridge,
'it is a giant with one idea.'

       *       *       *       *       *

He discoursed at great length on Scott's works. His poetry he considered
of that kind which will always he in demand, and that the supply will
always meet it, suited to the age. He does not consider that it in any
way goes below the surface of things; it does not reach to any
intellectual or spiritual emotion; it is altogether superficial, and he
felt it himself to be so. His descriptions are not true to Nature; they
are addressed to the ear, not to the mind. He was a master of bodily
movements in his battle-scenes; but very little productive power was
exerted in popular creations.


DUDDON EXCURSION

On Friday, the 6th September 1844, I set off to breakfast at Rydal
Mount, it being the day fixed by Mr. Wordsworth for our long-projected
excursion to the Valley of the Duddon.

       *       *       *       *       *

The rain fell in torrents, and it became doubtful whether we should set
off or not; but as it was a thunder-shower, we waited till it was over,
and then Wordsworth, Mr. Quillinan, Miss Hutchinson, and I, set forth in
our carriage to Coniston, where we were to find the Rydal Mount carriage
awaiting us with Mr. Hutchinson. Wordsworth talked very agreeably on the
way to Coniston, and repeated several verses of his own, which he seemed
pleased that Serjeant Talfourd had repeated to him the day before. He
mentioned a singular instance of T. Campbell's inaccuracy of memory in
having actually printed as his own a poem of Wordsworth's, 'The
Complaint:' he repeated it beautifully as we were going up the hill to
Coniston. On reaching the inn in the village of Coniston, the rain again
fell in torrents. At length, the carriages were ordered to the door with
the intention of our returning home; but just as they were ready the sun
broke out, and we turned the horse's head towards Ulpha Kirk. The right
bank of Coniston was all new to me after we passed the village, and Old
Man of Coniston. The scenery ceases to be bold and rugged, but is very
pleasing, the road passing through hazel copses, the openings showing
nice little cornfields and comfortable detached farms, with old
uncropped trees standing near them; some very fine specimens of old ash
trees, which I longed to transport to Easedale, where they have been so
cruelly lopped. The opening towards the sea, as we went on, was very
pleasing; but the first striking view of the Duddon was looking down
upon it soon after we passed Broughton, where you turn to the right, and
very soon after perceive the peculiar beauty of the valley, although it
does not take its wild and dreamlike beauty till you pass Ulpha Kirk. We
reversed the order of the sonnets, and saw the river first, 'in radiant
progress tow'rd the deep,' instead of tracing this 'child of the clouds'
from its cradle in the lofty waste. We reached the Kirk of Ulpha between
five and six. The appearance of the little farm-house inn at once made
anything approaching to a dinner an impossibility had we wished it ever
so much; but in due time we had tea and boiled ham, with two eggs
apiece, and were much invigorated by this our first Duddonian meal. The
hostess was evidently surprised that we thought of remaining all night,
so humbly did she think of the accommodation she had to offer. She
remembered Mr. Wordsworth sleeping there fifteen years ago, because it
was just after the birth of her daughter, a nice comely girl who
attended us at tea. Mr. Quillinan showed great good nature and
unselfishness in the arrangements he made, and the care he took of the
admirable horse, which I saw him feeding out of a tub, a manger being
too great a refinement for Ulpha.

       *       *       *       *       *

After tea, although it was getting dark, we went to the churchyard,
which commands a beautiful view towards Seathwaite, and we then walked
in that direction, through a lane where the walls were more richly
covered by moss and fern than any I ever saw before. A beautiful
dark-coloured tributary to the Duddon comes down from the moors on the
left hand, about a mile from Ulpha; and soon after we had passed the
small bridge over this stream, Mr. Wordsworth recollected a well which
he had discovered some thirty or forty years before. We went off the
road in search of it, through a shadowy, embowered path; and as it was
almost dark we should probably have failed in finding it, had we not
met a very tiny boy, with a can of water in his hand, who looked at us
in speechless amazement, when the Poet said, 'Is there a well here, my
little lad?' We found the well, and then joined the road again by
another path, leaving the child to ponder whether we were creatures of
earth or air.

       *       *       *       *       *

Saturday morning was cloudy but soft, and lovely in its hazy effects.
When I went out about seven, I saw Wordsworth going a few steps, and
then moving on, and stopping again, in a very abstracted manner; so I
kept back. But when he saw me, he advanced, and took me again to the
churchyard to see the morning effects, which were very lovely. He said
he had not slept well, that the recollection of former days and people
had crowded upon him, and, 'most of all, my dear sister; and when I
thought of her state, and of those who had passed away, Coleridge, and
Southey, and many others, while I am left with all my many infirmities,
if not sins, in full consciousness, how could I sleep? and then I took
to the alteration of sonnets, and that made the matter worse still.'
Then suddenly stopping before a little bunch of harebell, which, along
with some parsley fern, grew out of the wall near us, he exclaimed, 'How
perfectly beautiful that is!

    "Would that the little flowers that grow could live,
    Conscious of half the pleasure that they give."'

He then expatiated on the inexhaustible beauty of the arrangements of
Nature, its power of combining in the most secret recesses, and that it
must be for some purpose of beneficence that such operations existed.
After breakfast, we got into the cart of the inn, which had a seat swung
into it, upon which a bolster was put, in honour, I presume, of the Poet
Laureate. In this we jogged on to Seathwaite, getting out to ascend a
craggy eminence on the right, which Mrs. Wordsworth admired: the view
from it is very striking. You see from it all the peculiarities of the
vale, the ravine where the Duddon 'deserts the haunts of men,' 'the
spots of stationary sunshine,' and the homesteads which are scattered
here and there, both on the heights and in the lower ground near
protecting rocks and craggy steeps. Seathwaite I had a perfect
recollection of; and the way we approached it twenty years ago, from
Coniston over Walna Scar, is the way Mr. Wordsworth still recommends as
the most beautiful. We went on some distance beyond the chapel, and
every new turning and opening among the hills allured us on, till at
last the Poet was obliged to exercise the word of command, that we
should proceed no further. The return is always a flat thing, so I shall
not detail it, except that we reached our respective homes in good time;
and I hope I shall never cease to think with gratitude and pleasure of
the kindness of my honoured guide through the lovely scenes he has
rescued from obscurity, although it happily still remains an unvitiated
region, 'which stands in no need of the veil of twilight to soften or
disguise its features: as it glistens in the morning's sun it fills the
spectator's heart with gladsomeness.'

_November 21_.--My mother and I called at Rydal last Saturday, to see
the Wordsworths after their autumnal excursion. We found him only at
home, looking in great vigour and much the better for this little change
of scene and circumstance. He spoke with much interest of a
communication he had had from a benevolent surgeon at Manchester, an
admirer of his, who thinks that a great proportion of the blindness in
this country might be prevented by attention to the diseases of the eye
in childhood. He spoke of two very interesting blind ladies he had seen
at Leamington, one of whom had been at Rydal Mount a short time before
her 'total eclipse,' and now derived the greatest comfort from the
recollection of these beautiful scenes, almost the last she looked on.
He spoke of his own pleasure in returning to them, and of the effect of
the first view from 'Orrest Head,' the point mentioned in his
'unfortunate[250] sonnet, which has,' he said, 'you are aware, exposed
me to the most unlooked for accusations. They actually accuse me of
desiring to interfere with the innocent enjoyments of the poor, by
preventing this district becoming accessible to them by a railway. Now I
deny that it is to that class that this kind of scenery is either the
most improving or the most attractive. For the very poor the great God
of Nature has mercifully spread out His Bible everywhere; the common
sunshine, green fields, the blue sky, the shining river, are everywhere
to be met with in this country; and it is only an individual here and
there among the uneducated classes who feels very deeply the poetry of
lakes and mountains; and such persons would rather wander about where
they like, than rush through the country in a railway. It is not,
therefore, the poor, as a class, that would benefit morally or mentally
by a railway conveyance; while to the educated classes, to whom such
scenes as these give enjoyment of the purest kind, the effect would be
almost entirely destroyed.'

[250] See the Sonnet and Letters on the Furness Railway (vol. ii. p.
321). G.

_Wednesday, 20th Nov_.--A most remarkable halo was seen round the moon
soon after five o'clock to-day; the colours of the rainbow were most
brilliant, and the circle was entire for about five minutes.

Thursday, Mr. Wordsworth dined here with the Balls, Davys, and Mr.
Jefferies. Mr. W. spoke with much delight of the moon the day before,
and said his servant, whom he called 'dear James,' called his attention
to it.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Wednesday, Dec. 18th_.--The Wordsworths and Quillinans sat two hours
with us. He said he thought [Dr. Arnold] was mistaken in the philosophy
of his view of the danger of Milton's Satan being represented without
horns and hoofs; that Milton's conception was as true as it was grand;
that making sin ugly was a common-place notion compared with making it
beautiful outwardly, and inwardly a hell. It assumed every form of
ambition and worldliness, the form in which sin attacks the highest
natures.

       *       *       *       *       *

This day, Sunday, the 9th of February, the snow is again falling fast,
but very gently. Yesterday, the 8th, was a beautiful day. We had a very
pleasant visit of above an hour from Wordsworth and his wife. He was in
excellent spirits, and repeated with a solemn beauty, quite peculiar to
himself, a sonnet he had lately composed on 'Young England;' and his
indignant burst 'Where then is _old_, our dear old England?' was one of
the finest bursts of Nature and Art combined I have ever heard. My dear
mother's face, too, while he was repeating it, was a fine addition to
the picture; and I could not help feeling they were both noble specimens
of 'dear old England.' Mrs. Wordsworth, too, is a goodly type of another
class of old England, more thoroughly English perhaps than either of the
others, but they made an admirable trio; and Mrs. Wordsworth's face
expressed more admiration of her husband in his bardic mood than I ever
saw before. He discussed mesmerism very agreeably, stating strongly his
detestation of clairvoyance; not only on the presumption of its being
altogether false, but supposing it, for argument sake, to be true, then
he thinks it would be an engine of enormous evil, putting it in the
power of any malicious person to blast the character of another, and
shaking to the very foundations the belief in individual responsibility.
He is not disposed to reject without examination the assertions with
regard to the curative powers of mesmerism. He spoke to-day with
pleasure of having heard that Mr. Lockhart had been struck by his lines
from a MSS. poem, printed in his Railway-Sonnet pamphlet.

       *       *       *       *       *

_February 24th_.--Snow still on the ground. It has never been quite
clear of snow since the 27th January. Partial thaws have allowed us to
peep out into the world of Ambleside and Rydal; and last Saturday we
drank tea at Foxhow, and met the Wordsworths and Miss F----. He is very
happy to have his friend home again, and was in a very agreeable mood.
He repeated his sonnet on the 'Pennsylvanians,' and again that on 'Young
England,' which I admire so much.

       *       *       *       *       *

_March 6th_.--Wordsworth, whom we met yesterday at dinner at the Oaks,
expressed his dislike to monuments in churches; partly from the
absurdity and falsehood of the epitaphs which sometimes belonged to
them, and partly from their injuring the architectural beauties of the
edifice, as they grievously did in Westminster Abbey and many other
cathedrals. He made an exception in favour of those old knightly
monuments, which he admitted added to the solemnity of the scene, and
were in keeping with the buildings; and he added, 'I must also except
another monument which once made a deep impression on my mind. It was in
a small church near St. Alban's; and I once left London in the
afternoon, so as to sleep at St. Alban's the first night, and have a few
hours of evening light to visit this church. It was before the invention
of railways, and I determined that I would always do the same; but, the
year after, railways existed, and I have never been able to carry out my
project again: all wandering is now over. Well, I went to this small
country church; and just opposite the door at which you enter, the
figure of the great Lord Bacon, in pure white, was the first thing that
presented itself. I went there to see his tomb, but I did not expect to
see himself; and it impressed me deeply. There he was, a man whose fame
extends over the whole civilised world, sitting calmly, age after age,
in white robes of pure alabaster, in this small country church, seldom
visited except by some stray traveller, he having desired to be interred
in this spot, to lie near his mother.'

On referring to Mallet's Life of Bacon, I see he mentions that he was
privately buried at St. Michael's church, near St. Alban's; and it adds,
'The spot that contains his remains lay obscure and undistinguished,
till the gratitude of a private man, formerly his servant' (Sir Thomas
Meautys), 'erected a monument to his name and memory.' This makes it
probable that the likeness is a correct one.

_November 8th_, 1845.--On our way to take an early dinner at Foxhow
yesterday, we met the Poet at the foot of his own hill, and he engaged
us to go to tea to the Mount on our way home to hear their adventures,
he and his Mary having just returned from a six weeks' wander among
their friends. During their absence we always feel that the road between
Grasmere and Ambleside is wanting in something, beautiful as it is. We
reached the Mount before six, and found dear Mrs. Wordsworth much
restored by her tour. She has enjoyed the visit to her kith and kin in
Herefordshire extremely, and we had a nice comfortable chat round the
fire and the tea-table. After tea, in speaking of the misfortune it was
when a young man did not seem more inclined to one profession than
another, Wordsworth said that he had always some feeling of indulgence
for men at that age who felt such a difficulty. He had himself passed
through it, and had incurred the strictures of his friends and relations
on this subject. He said that after he had finished his college course,
he was in great doubt as to what his future employment should be. He did
not feel himself good enough for the Church, he felt that his mind was
not properly disciplined for that holy office, and that the struggle
between his conscience and his impulses would have made life a torture.
He also shrank from the law, although Southey often told him that he was
well fitted for the higher parts of the profession. He had studied
military history with great interest, and the strategy of war; and he
always fancied that he had talents for command; and he at one time
thought of a military life, but then he was without connections, and he
felt if he were ordered to the West Indies his talents would not save
him from the yellow fever, and he gave that up. At this time he had only
a hundred a year. Upon this he lived, and travelled, and married, for it
was not until the late Lord Lonsdale came into possession that the money
which was due to them was restored. He mentioned this to show how
difficult it often was to judge of what was passing in a young man's
mind, but he thought that for the generality of men, it was much better
that they should be early led to the exercise of a profession of their
own choice.

_December_ 1846.--Henry Fletcher and I dined at the Mount on the 21st of
this month. The party consisted of Mr. Crabb Robinson (their Christmas
guest), Mrs. Arnold, Miss Martineau, and ourselves. My mother's cold was
too bad to allow her to go, which I regretted, as it was, like all their
little meetings, most sociable and agreeable. Wordsworth was much
pleased with a little notice of his new edition in the _Examiner_; he
thought it very well done. He expressed himself very sweetly at dinner
on the pleasant terms of neighbourly kindness we enjoyed in the valleys.
It will be pleasant in after times to remember his words, and still more
his manner when he said this, it was done with such perfect simplicity
and equality of feeling, without the slightest reference to self, and I
am sure without thinking of himself at the time as more than one of the
little circle whose friendly feeling he was commending.

       *       *       *       *       *

_October_ 1846.--Wordsworth dined with us one day last week, and was in
much greater vigour than I have seen him all this summer.

       *       *       *       *       *

He mentioned incidentally that the spelling of our language was very
much fixed in the time of Charles the Second, and that the attempts
which had been made since, and are being made in the present day, were
not likely to succeed. He entered his protest as usual against
[Carlyle's] style, and said that since Johnson no writer had done so
much to vitiate the English language. He considers Lord Chesterfield the
last good English writer before Johnson. Then came the Scotch
historians, who did infinite mischief to style, with the exception of
Smollett, who wrote good pure English. He quite agreed to the saying
that all great poets wrote good prose; he said there was not one
exception. He does not think Burns's prose equal to his verse, but this
he attributes to his writing his letters in English words, while in his
verse he was not trammelled in this way, but let his numbers have their
own way.

_Lancrigg, November_.--Mr. and Mrs. Wordsworth took an early dinner with
us on the 26th of this month. He was very vigorous, and spoke of his
majority at Glasgow, also of his reception at Oxford. He told us of an
application he had just had from a Glasgow publisher that he should
write a sonnet in praise of Fergusson and Allan Ramsay, to prefix to a
new edition of those Poets which was about to appear. He intended to
reply, that Burns's lines to Fergusson would be a much more appropriate
tribute than anything he could write; and he went on to say that Burns
owed much to Fergusson, and that he had taken the plan of many of his
poems from Fergusson, and the measure also. He did not think this at all
detracted from the merit of Burns, for he considered it a much higher
effort of genius to excel in degree, than to strike out what may be
called an original poem. He spoke highly of the purity of language of
the Scotch poets of an earlier period, Gavin Douglass and others, and
said that they greatly excelled the English poets, after Chaucer, which
he attributed to the distractions of England during the wars of York and
Lancaster.

_December 25th_, 1846.--My mother and I called at Rydal Mount yesterday
early, to wish our dear friends the blessings of the season. Mrs. W. met
us at the door most kindly, and we found him before his good fire in the
dining-room, with a flock of robins feasting at the window. He had an
old tattered book in his hand; and as soon as he had given us a cordial
greeting, he said, in a most animated manner, 'I must read to you what
Mary and I have this moment finished. It is a passage in the Life of
Thomas Elwood.' He then read to us the following extract:

'Some little time before I went to Alesbury prison, I was desired by my
quondam master, Milton, to take an house for him in the neighbourhood
where I dwell, that he might get out of the city, for the safety of
himself and his family, the pestilence then growing hot in London. I
took a pretty box for him in Giles-Chalford, a mile from me, of which I
gave him notice; and intended to have waited on him, and seen him well
settled in it, but was prevented by that imprisonment.

'But now being released, and returned home, I soon made a visit to him,
to welcome him into the country.

'After some common discourses had passed between us, he called for a
manuscript of his, which being brought, he delivered to me, bidding me
take it home with me and read it at my leisure; and when I had so done,
return it to him with my judgment thereupon.

'When I came home, and had set myself to read it, I found it was that
excellent poem which he entituled 'Paradise Lost.' After I had with the
best attention read it through, I made him another visit, and returned
him his book with due acknowledgment of the favour he had done me in
communicating it to me. He asked me how I liked it, and what I thought
of it, which I modestly, but freely told him; and after some further
discourse about it, I pleasantly said to him, "Thou hast said much here
of Paradise lost, but what hast thou to say of Paradise found?" He made
me no answer, but sate some time in a muse; then brake off that
discourse, and fell upon another subject. After the sickness was over,
and the city well cleansed and become safely habitable again, he
returned thither; and when afterwards I went to wait on him there (which
I seldom failed of doing whenever my occasions drew me to London), he
showed me his second poem, called "Paradise Regained;" and in a
pleasant tone said to me, "This is owing to you, for you put it into my
head by the question you put to me at Chalford, which before I had not
thought of." _But from this digression I return to the family I then
lived in.'_

Wordsworth was highly diverted with the _apology_ of the worthy Quaker,
for _the digression_, which has alone saved him from oblivion. He
offered to send us the old book, which came a few days after; and I
shall add another digression in favour of John Milton, to whom he
appears to have been introduced about the year 1661, by a Dr. Paget. It
is thus notified _apropos_ to Thomas Elwood feeling a desire for more
learning than he possessed, which having expressed to Isaac Pennington,
with whom he himself lived as tutor to his children, he says, 'Isaac
Pennington had an intimate acquaintance with Dr. Paget, a physician of
note in London, and he with John Milton, a gentleman of great note for
learning throughout the learned world, for the accurate pieces he had
written on various subjects and occasions. This person having filled a
public station in the former times, lived now a private and retired life
in London, and, having wholly lost his sight, kept always a man to read
to him, which usually was the son of some gentleman of his acquaintance,
whom in kindness he took to improve in his learning.

'He received me courteously, as well for the sake of Dr. Paget, who
introduced me, as of Isaac Pennington who recommended me, to both whom
he bore a good respect; and having inquired divers things of me, with
respect to my former progression in learning, he dismissed me to provide
myself of such accommodations as might be most suitable to my future
studies.

'I went, therefore, and took myself a lodging as near to his house,
which was then in Jewin-street, as conveniently I could, and from
thenceforward went every day in the afternoon (except on the first days
of the week), and sitting by him in his dining-room, read to him in such
books in the Latin tongue as he pleased to hear me read.'


(VI.) MRS. DAVY (CONTINUED).

The Oaks, Ambleside, Jan. 15. 1845.

We dined to-day at Rydal Mount. Mr. Wordsworth, during dinner, grave and
silent, till, on some remark having been made on the present condition
of the Church, he most unreservedly gave his own views; and gave
expression, as I have only once heard him give before, to his own
earnest, devout, humble feelings as a Christian. In the evening, being
led by some previous conversation to speak of St. Paul, he said, 'Oh,
what a character that is! how well we know him! How human, yet how
noble! How little outward sufferings moved him! It is not in speaking of
these that he calls himself wretched; it is when he speaks of the inward
conflict. Paul and David,' he said, 'may be called the two Shakspearian
characters in the Bible; both types, as it were, of human nature in its
strength and its weakness. Moses is grand, but then it is chiefly from
position, from the office he had entrusted to him. We do not know Moses
as a man, as a brother man.'

_April_ 7, 1846.--I went to the Mount to-day, to pay my respects to Mr.
Wordsworth on his birthday. I found him and dear Mrs. Wordsworth very
happy, in the arrival of their four grandsons. The two elder are to go
to Rossall next week. Some talk concerning schools led Mr. Wordsworth
into a discourse, which, in relation to himself, I thought very
interesting, on the dangers of emulation, as used in the way of help to
school progress. Mr. Wordsworth thinks that envy is too likely to go
along with this, and therefore would hold it to be unsafe. 'In my own
case,' he said, 'I never felt emulation with another man but once, and
that was accompanied by envy. It is a horrid feeling.' This 'once' was
in the study of Italian, which, he continued, 'I entered on at college
along with ----' (I forget the name he mentioned). 'I never engaged in
the proper studies of the university, so that in these I had no
temptation to envy any one; but I remember with pain that I _had_
envious feelings when my fellow-student in Italian got before me. I was
his superior in many departments of mind, but he was the better Italian
scholar, and I envied him. The annoyance this gave me made me feel that
emulation was dangerous for _me_, and it made me very thankful that as a
boy I never experienced it. I felt very early the force of the words,
"Be ye perfect even as your Father in heaven is perfect," and as a
teacher, or friend, or counsellor of youth, I would hold forth no other
motive to exertion than this. There is, I think, none other held forth
in the gospels. No permission is given to emulation there.... There must
always be a danger of incurring the passion of vanity by emulation. If
we try to outstrip a fellow-creature, and succeed, we may naturally
enough be proud. The true lesson of humility is to strive after
conformity to that excellence which we never can surpass, never even by
a great distance attain to.' There was, in the whole manner as well as
matter of Mr. Wordsworth's discourse on this subject, a deep veneration
for the will of God concerning us, which I shall long remember with
interest and delight--I hope with profit. 'Oh! one other time,' he
added, smiling, 'one other time in my life I felt envy. It was when my
brother was nearly certain of success in a foot race with me. I tripped
up his heels. This _must_ have been envy.'

       *       *       *       *       *

                   Lesketh How, Jan. 11. 1847.

In a morning visit by our fireside to-day from Mr. Wordsworth, something
led to the mention of Milton, whose poetry, he said, was earlier a
favourite with him than that of Shakspeare. Speaking of Milton's not
allowing his daughters to learn the meaning of the Greek they read to
him, or at least not exerting himself to teach it to them, he admitted
that this seemed to betoken a low estimate of the condition and purposes
of the female mind. 'And yet, where could he have picked up such
notions,' said Mr. W., 'in a country which had seen so many women of
learning and talent? But his opinion of what women ought to be, it may
be presumed, is given in the unfallen Eve, as contrasted with the right
condition of man before his Maker:

    "He for God only, she for God in him."

Now that,' said Mr. Wordsworth, earnestly, '_is_ a low, a very low and a
very false estimate of woman's condition.' He was amused on my showing
him the (almost) contemporary notice of Milton by Wycherly, and, after
reading it, spoke a good deal of the obscurity of men of genius in or
near their own times. 'But the most singular thing,' he continued, 'is,
that in all the writings of Bacon there is not one allusion to
Shakspeare.'

Lasketh How, Jan. 10. 1849.

A long fireside visit from Mr. Wordsworth this morning, in highly
sociable spirits; speaking much of old days and old acquaintances. He
spoke with much regret of Scott's careless views about money, and said
that he had often spoken to him of the duty of economy, as a means to
insure literary independence. Scott's reply always was, 'Oh, I can make
as much as I please by writing.' 'This,' said Mr. W., 'was marvellous to
me, who had never written a line with a view to profit.' Speaking of his
own prose writing, he said, that but for Coleridge's irregularity of
purpose he should probably have left much more in that kind behind him.
When Coleridge was proposing to publish his 'Friend,' he (Mr.
Wordsworth) offered contributions. Coleridge expressed himself pleased
with the offer, but said, 'I must arrange my principles for the work,
and when that is done I shall be glad of your aid.' But this
'arrangement of principles' never took place. Mr. Wordsworth added, 'I
think my nephew, Dr. _Conversations and Personal Reminiscences_.

Wordsworth,[251] will, after my death, collect and publish all I have
written in prose.'

On this day, as I have heard him more than once before, Mr. Wordsworth,
in a way very earnest, and to me very impressive and remarkable,
disclaimed all value for, all concern about, posthumous fame.[252]

_(e)_ CONVERSATIONS AND REMINISCENCES RECORDED BY THE (NOW) BISHOP OF
LINCOLN, &c.

Remember, first read the ancient classical authors; _then_ come to
_us_; and you will be able to judge for yourself which of us is worth
reading.

The first book of Homer appears to be independent of the rest. The plan
of the _Odyssey_ is more methodical than that of the _Iliad_. The
character of Achilles seems to me one of the grandest ever conceived.
There is something awful in it, particularly in the circumstance of his
acting under an abiding foresight of his own death. One day, conversing
with Payne Knight and Uvedale Price concerning Homer, I expressed my
admiration of Nestor's speech, as eminently natural, where he tells the
Greek leaders that _they_ are mere children in comparison with the
heroes of _old_ whom _he_ had known[253]. 'But,' said Knight and Price,
'that passage is spurious.' However, I will not part with it. It is
interesting to compare the same characters (Ajax, for instance) as
treated by Homer, and then afterwards by the Greek dramatists, and to
mark the difference of handling. In the plays of Euripides, politics
come in as a disturbing force: Homer's characters act on physical
impulse. There is more _introversion_ in the dramatist: whence
Aristotle rightly calls him _tsagichhôtatos_. The tower-scene, where
Helen comes into the presence of Priam and the old Trojans, displays one
of the most beautiful pictures anywhere to be seen. Priam's speech[254]
on that occasion is a striking proof of the courtesy and delicacy of the
Homeric age, or, at least, of Homer himself.

[251] On another occasion, I believe, he intimated a desire that his
works in Prose should be edited by his son-in-law, Mr. Quillinan.
(_Memoirs,_ ii. 466.)

[252] _Memoirs,_ ii. 437-66.

[253] _Iliad_, i. 260.

[254] _Ibid._ iii. 156.

Catullus translated literally from the Greek; succeeding Roman writers
did not so, because Greek had then become the fashionable, universal
language. They did not translate, but they paraphrased; the ideas
remaining the same, their dress different. Hence the attention of the
poets of the Augustan age was principally confined to the happy
selection of the most appropriate words and elaborate phrases; and hence
arises the difficulty of translating them.

The characteristics ascribed by Horace to Pindar in his ode, 'Pindarum
quisquis,' &c. are not found in his extant writings. Horace had many
lyrical effusions of the Theban bard which we have not. How graceful is
Horace's modesty in his 'Ego _apis_ Matinae More modoque,' as contrasted
with the Dircaean Swan! Horace is my great favourite: I love him dearly.

I admire Virgil's high moral tone: for instance, that sublime 'Aude,
hospes, contemnere opes,' &c. and 'his dantem jura Catonem!' What
courage and independence of spirit is there! There is nothing more
imaginative and awful than the passage,

    '----Arcades ipsum
    Credunt se vidisse Jovem,' &c.[255]

In describing the weight of sorrow and fear on Dido's mind, Virgil shows
great knowledge of human nature, especially in that exquisite touch of
feeling[256],

    'Hoc visum nulli, _non ipsi effata sorori.'_

The ministry of Confession is provided to satisfy the natural desire for
some relief from the load of grief. Here, as in so many other respects,
the Church of Rome adapts herself with consummate skill to our nature,
and is strong by our weaknesses. Almost all her errors and corruptions
are abuses of what is good.

I think Buchanan's 'Maiae Calendae' equal in sentiment, if not in
elegance, to anything in Horace; but your brother Charles, to whom I
repeated it the other day, pointed out a false quantity in it[257].
Happily this had escaped me.

[255] _Aen_. viii. 352.

[256] _Ibid._ iv. 455.

[257] If I remember right, it is in the third line,

'Ludisque dicatae, jocisque;'

a strange blunder, for Buchanan must have read Horace's,

'Quid dedicatum poscit Apolliuem,'

a hundred times.

When I began to give myself up to the profession of a poet for life, I
was impressed with a conviction, that there were four English poets whom
I must have continually before me as examples--Chaucer, Shakspeare,
Spenser, and Milton. These I must study, and equal _if I could_; and I
need not think of the rest[258].

[258] This paragraph was communicated by Mr. H.C. Robinson.

I have been charged by some with disparaging Pope and Dryden. This is
not so. I have committed much of both to memory. As far as Pope goes, he
succeeds; but his Homer is not Homer, but Pope.

I cannot account for Shakspeare's low estimate of his own writings,
except from the sublimity, the superhumanity, of his genius. They were
infinitely below his conception of what they might have been, and ought
to have been.

The mind often does not think, when it thinks that it is thinking. If we
were to give our whole soul to anything, as the bee does to the flower,
I conceive there would be little difficulty in any intellectual
employment. Hence there is no excuse for obscurity in writing.

'Macbeth,' is the best conducted of Shakspeare's plays. The fault of
'Julius Caesar,' 'Hamlet,' and 'Lear,' is, that the interest is not, and
by the nature of the case could not be, sustained to their conclusion.
The death of Julius Caesar is too _overwhelming_ an incident for _any_
stage of the drama but the _last_. It is an incident to which the mind
clings, and from which it will not be torn away to share in other
sorrows. The same may be said of the madness of Lear. Again, the opening
of 'Hamlet' is full of exhausting interest. There is more mind in
'Hamlet' than in any other play, more knowledge of human nature. The
first act is incomparable.... There is too much of an every-day sick
room in the death-bed scene of Catherine, in 'Henry the Eighth'--too
much of leeches and apothecaries' vials.... 'Zanga' is a bad imitation
of 'Othello.' Garrick never ventured on Othello: he could not submit to
a blacked face. He rehearsed the part once. During the rehearsal Quin
entered, and, having listened for some time with attention, exclaimed,
'Well done, David! but where's the teakettle?' alluding to the print of
Hogarth, where a black boy follows his mistress with a teakettle in his
hand.... In stature Garrick was short.... A fact which conveys a high
notion of his powers is, that he was able to _act out_ the absurd
stage-costume of those days. He represented Coriolanus in the attire of
Cheapside. I remember hearing from Sir G. Beaumont, that while he was
venting, as Lear, the violent paroxysms of his rage in the awful tempest
scene, his wig happened to fall off. The accident did not produce the
slightest effect on the gravity of the house, so strongly had he
impregnated every breast with his own emotions.

Some of my friends (H.C. for instance) doubt whether poetry on
contemporary persons and events can be good. But I instance Spenser's
'Marriage,' and Milton's 'Lycidas.' True, the 'Persae' is one of the
worst of Aeschylus's plays; at least, in my opinion.

Milton is falsely represented by some as a democrat. He was an
aristocrat in the truest sense of the word. See the quotation from him
in my 'Convention of Cintra.'[259] Indeed, he spoke in very proud and
contemptuous terms, of the populace. 'Comus' is rich in beautiful and
sweet flowers, and in exuberant leaves of genius; but the ripe and
mellow fruit is in 'Samson Agonistes.' When he wrote that, his mind was
Hebraized. Indeed, his genius fed on the writings of the Hebrew
prophets. This arose, in some degree, from the temper of the times; the
Puritan lived in the Old Testament, almost to the exclusion of the New.

The works of the old English dramatists are the gardens of our language.

One of the noblest things in Milton is the description of that sweet,
quiet morning in the 'Paradise Regained,' after that terrible night of
howling wind and storm. The contrast is divine.[260]

[259] Page 174 (vol. i.), where Milton speaks of the evils suffered by a
nation,' unless men more than vulgar, bred up in the knowledge of
ancient and illustrious deeds, conduct its affairs.'

[260] _Paradise Regained_, iv. 431.

What a virulent democrat ---- is! A man ill at ease with his own
conscience is sure to quarrel with all government, order, and law.

The influence of Locke's Essay was not due to its own merits, which are
considerable; but to external circumstances. It came forth at a happy
opportunity, and coincided with the prevalent opinions of the time. The
Jesuit doctrines concerning the papal power in deposing kings, and
absolving subjects from their allegiance, had driven some Protestant
theologians to take refuge in the theory of the divine right of kings.
This theory was unpalatable to the world at large, and others invented
the more popular doctrine of a social contract, in its place; a doctrine
which history refutes. But Locke did what he could to accommodate this
principle to his own system.

The only basis on which property can rest is right derived from
prescription.

The best of Locke's works, as it seems to me, is that in which he
attempts the least--his _Conduct of the Understanding_.

In the Summer of 1827, speaking of some of his contemporaries,
Wordsworth said, T. Moore has great natural genius; but he is too lavish
of brilliant ornament. His poems smell of the perfumer's and milliner's
shops. He is not content with a ring and a bracelet, but he must have
rings in the ears, rings on the nose--rings everywhere.

Walter Scott is not a careful composer. He allows himself many
liberties, which betray a want of respect for his reader. For instance,
he is too fond of inversions; _i.e._ he often places the verb before the
substantive, and the accusative before the verb. W. Scott quoted, as
from me,

    'The swan on _sweet_ St. Mary's lake
    Floats double, swan and shadow,'

instead of _still_; thus obscuring my idea, and betraying his own
uncritical principles of composition.

Byron seems to me deficient in _feeling_. Professor Wilson, I think,
used to say that 'Beppo' was his best poem; because all his faults were
there brought to a height. I never read the 'English Bards' through. His
critical prognostications have, for the most part, proved erroneous.

Sir James Mackintosh said of me to M. de Staël, Wordsworth is not a
great poet, but he is the greatest man among poets.' Madame de Staël
complained of my style.

Now whatever may be the result of my experiment in the subjects which I
have chosen for poetical composition--be they vulgar or be they not,--I
can say without vanity, that I have bestowed great pains on my _style_,
full as much as any of my contemporaries have done on theirs. I yield to
none in _love for my art_. I, therefore, labour at it with reverence,
affection, and industry. My main endeavour as to style has been that my
poems should be written in pure intelligible English. Lord Byron has
spoken severely of my compositions. However faulty they may be, I do not
think that I ever could have prevailed upon myself to print such lines
as he has done; for instance,

    'I stood at Venice on the Bridge of Sighs,
    A palace and a prison on each hand.'

Some person ought to write a critical review, analysing Lord Byron's
language, in order to guard others against imitating him in these
respects.

Shelley is one of the best _artists_ of us all: I mean in workmanship of
style.

At Calgarth, dining with Mrs. and the Miss Watsons ... a very fine
portrait of the late Bishop in the dining-room.... Mr. Wordsworth there:
a very agreeable party. Walked home with him in the evening to Rydal. It
rained all the way. We met a poor woman in the road. She sobbed as she
passed us. Mr. Wordsworth was much affected with her condition: she was
swollen with dropsy, and slowly hobbling along with a stick, having been
driven from one lodging to another. It was a dark stormy night. Mr.
Wordsworth brought her back to the Lowwood Inn, where, by the landlord's
leave, she was housed in one of his barns.

One day I met Mr. M.T. Sadler at the late Archbishop's. Sadler did not
know me; and before dinner he began to launch forth in a critical
dissertation on contemporary English Poetry. 'Among living poets, your
Grace may know there is one called Wordsworth, whose writings the world
calls childish and puerile, but I think some of them wonderfully
pathetic.' 'Now, Mr. Sadler,' said the Archbishop, 'what a scrape you
are in! here is Mr. Wordsworth: but go down with him to dinner, and you
will find that, though a great poet, he does not belong to the "genus
irritabile."' This was very happy.

After returning one day from church at Addington, I took the liberty of
saying a few words on the sermon we had heard. It was a very homely
performance. 'I am rather surprised, my Lord Archbishop, that when your
Grace can have the choice of so many preachers in England, you do not
provide better for yourself.' 'Oh!' said he, 'I think I can bear bad
preaching better than most people, and I therefore keep it to myself.'
This seemed to me a very pleasing trait in the gentle and loveable
character of that admirable man.

Patriarchal usages have not quite deserted us of these valleys. This
morning (new year's day) you were awakened early by the minstrels
playing under the eaves, 'Honour to Mr. Wordsworth!' 'Honour to Mrs.
Wordsworth!' and so to each member of the household by name, servants
included, each at his own window. These customs bind us together as a
family, and are as beneficial as they are delightful. May they never
disappear!

In my Ode on the 'Intimations of Immortality in Childhood,' I do not
profess to give a literal representation of the state of the affections
and of the moral being in childhood. I record my own feelings at that
time--my absolute spirituality, my 'all-soulness,' if I may so speak. At
that time I could not believe that I should lie down quietly in the
grave, and that my body would moulder into dust.

Many of my poems have been influenced by my own circumstances when I was
writing them. 'The Warning' was composed on horseback, while I was
riding from Moresby in a snow-storm. Hence the simile in that poem,

    'While thoughts press on and feelings overflow,
    And quick words round him fall like _flakes of snow_.'

In the 'Ecclesiastical Sonnets,' the lines concerning the Monk (Sonnet
xxi.),

      'Within his cell.
    Round the decaying trunk of human pride.
    At morn, and eve, and midnight's silent hour,
    Do penitential cogitations cling:
    Like ivy round some ancient elm they twine
    In grisly folds and strictures serpentine;
    Yet while they strangle, a fair growth they bring
    For recompence--their own perennial bower;'--

were suggested to me by a beautiful tree clad as thus described, which
you may remember in Lady Fleming's park at Rydal, near the path to the
upper waterfall.

S----, in the work you mentioned to me, confounds _imagery_ and
_imagination_. Sensible objects really existing, and felt to exist, are
_imagery_; and they may form the materials of a descriptive poem, where
objects are delineated as they are. Imagination is a subjective term: it
deals with objects not as they are, but as they appear to the mind of
the poet.

The imagination is that intellectual lens through the medium of which
the poetical observer sees the objects of his observation, modified both
in form and colour; or it is that inventive dresser of dramatic
_tableaux_, by which the persons of the play are invested with new
drapery, or placed in new attitudes; or it is that chemical faculty by
which elements of the most different nature and distant origin are
blended together into one harmonious and homogeneous whole.

A beautiful instance of the modifying and _investive_ power of
imagination may be seen in that noble passage of Dyer's 'Ruins of
Rome,'[261] where the poet hears the voice of Time; and in Thomson's
description of the streets of Cairo, expecting the arrival of the
caravan which had perished in the storm,[262]

Read all Cowley; he is very valuable to a collector of English sound
sense.... Burns's 'Scots wha hae' is poor as a lyric composition.

Ariosto and Tasso are very absurdly depressed in order to elevate Dante.
Ariosto is not always sincere; Spenser always so.

I have tried to read Goethe. I never could succeed. Mr. ---- refers me
to his 'Iphigenia,' but I there recognise none of the dignified
simplicity, none of the health and vigour which the heroes and heroines
of antiquity possess in the writings of Homer. The lines of Lucretius
describing the immolation of Iphigenia are worth the whole of Goethe's
long poem. Again, there is a profligacy, an inhuman sensuality, in his
works which is utterly revolting. I am not intimately acquainted with
them generally. But I take up my ground on the first canto of 'Wilhelm
Meister;' and, as the attorney-general of human nature, I there indict
him for wantonly outraging the sympathies of humanity. Theologians tell
us of the degraded nature of man; and they tell us what is true. Yet man
is essentially a moral agent, and there is that immortal and
unextinguishable yearning for something pure and spiritual which will
plead against these poetical sensualists as long as man remains what he
is.

[261] 1. 37:

    'The pilgrim oft,
     At dead of night, 'mid his oraison, hears
     Aghast the voice of TIME, disparting towers,' &c.


[262] Thomson's 'Summer,' 980:

   'In Cairo's crowded streets,
    The impatient merchant, wondering, waits in vain,
    And Mecca saddens at the long delay.'

Scientific men are often too fond of aiming to be men of the world.
They crave too much for titles, and stars, and ribbons. If Bacon had
dwelt only in the court of Nature, and cared less for that of James the
First, he would have been a greater man, and a happier one too.

I heard lately from young Mr. Watt a noble instance of magnanimity in an
eminent French chemist. He had made a discovery, which he was informed
would, if he took out a patent, realise a large fortune. 'No,' said he,
'I do not live to amass money, but to discover Truth; and as long as she
attends me in my investigations so long will I serve her and her only.'

Sir ---- I know from my own experience was ruined by prosperity. The age
of Leo X. would have shone with greater brilliance if it had had more
clouds to struggle with. The age of Louis XIV. was formed by the Port
Royal amid the storms and thunders of the League. Racine lived in a
court till it became necessary to his existence, as his miserable death
proved. Those petty courts of Germany have been injurious to its
literature. They who move in them are too prone to imagine themselves to
be the whole world, and compared with the whole world they are nothing
more than these little specks in the texture of this hearth-rug.

As I was riding Dora's pony from Rydal to Cambridge, I got off, as I
occasionally did, to walk. I fell in with a sweet-looking peasant girl
of nine or ten years old. She had been to carry her father's dinner, who
was working in the fields, and she was wheeling a little wheelbarrow, in
which she collected manure from the roads for her garden at home. After
some talk I gave her a penny, for which she thanked me in the sweetest
way imaginable. I wish I had asked her whether she could read, and
whether she went to school. But I could not help being struck with the
happy arrangement which Nature has made for the education of the heart,
an arrangement which it seems the object of the present age to
counteract instead of to cherish and confirm. I imagined the happy
delight of the father in seeing his child at a distance, and watching
her as she approached to perform her errand of love. I imagined the joy
of the mother in seeing her return. I am strongly of opinion (an opinion
you, perhaps, have seen expressed by me in a letter to Mr. Rose[263])
that this is the discipline which is more calculated by a thousand
degrees to make a virtuous and happy nation than the all-engrossing,
estranging, eleemosynary institutions for education, which perhaps
communicate more _knowledge_. In these institutions what the pupils gain
in _knowledge_ they often lose in _wisdom_. This is a distinction which
must never be lost sight of.

[263] See vol. i. pp. 340-8. G.

Education should never be wholly eleemosynary. But must the parent
suffer privations for the sake of the child? Yes; for these privations
endear the child to the parent, and the parent to the child; and
whatever education the parent may thus gain or lose for his child, he
has thus gained the noblest result of the most liberal education for
himself--the habit of self-denial.

Next to your principles, and affections, and health, value your
time.[264]

[264] _Memoirs_, ii. pp. 467-80.

       *       *       *       *       *




(_f_) REMINISCENCES OF THE REV. R.P. GRAVES, M.A., FORMERLY OF
WINDERMERE, NOW OF DUBLIN.

I remember Mr. Wordsworth saying that, at a particular stage of his
mental progress, he used to be frequently so rapt into an unreal
transcendental world of ideas that the external world seemed no longer
to exist in relation to him, and he had to reconvince himself of its
existence _by clasping a tree_, or something that happened to be near
him. I could not help connecting this fact with that obscure passage in
his great Ode on the 'Intimations of Immortality,' in which he speaks of

          'Those obstinate questionings
      Of sense and outward things;
      Fallings from us, vanishings:
      Blank misgivings of a creature,
    Moving about in worlds not realised,' &c.

I heard him once make the remark that it would be a good habit to watch
closely the first involuntary thoughts upon waking in the morning, as
indications of the real current of the moral being.

I was struck by what seemed to me a beautiful analogy, which I once
heard him draw, and which was new to me--that the individual characters
of mankind showed themselves distinctively in childhood and youth, as
those of trees in Spring; that of both, of trees in Summer and of human
kind in middle life, they were then alike to a great degree merged in a
dull uniformity; and that again, in Autumn and in declining age, there
appeared afresh all their original and inherent variety brought out into
view with deeper marking of character, with more vivid contrast, and
with greater accession of interest and beauty.

He thought the charm of _Robinson Crusoe_ mistakenly ascribed, as it
commonly is done, to its _naturalness_. Attaching a full value to the
singular yet easily imagined and most picturesque circumstances of the
adventurer's position, to the admirable painting of the scenes, and to
the knowledge displayed of the working of human feelings, he yet felt
sure that the intense interest created by the story arose chiefly from
the extraordinary energy and resource of the hero under his difficult
circumstances, from their being so far beyond what it was natural to
expect, or what would have been exhibited by the average of men; and
that similarly the high pleasure derived from his successes and good
fortunes arose from the peculiar source of these uncommon merits of his
character.

I have heard him pronounce that the Tragedy of _Othello_, Plato's
records of the last scenes of the career of Socrates, and Isaac Walton's
_Life of George Herbert_, were in his opinion the most pathetic of human
compositions.

In a walk one day, after stopping, according to his custom, to claim
admiration for some happy aspect of the landscape, or beautiful
_composition_ on a smaller scale of natural objects, caught by him at
the precisely best point of view in the midst of his conversation on
other subjects, he added, good-humouredly, that there were three
callings for success in which Nature had furnished him with
qualifications--the callings of poet, landscape-gardener, and critic of
pictures and works of art. On hearing this I could not but remember how
his qualifications for the second were proved by the surprising variety
of natural beauties he managed to display to their best advantage, from
the very circumscribed limits of the garden at Rydal Mount, 'an
invisible hand of art everywhere working' (to use his own exquisite
expression) 'in the very spirit of Nature,' and how many there were who
have owed the charm of their grounds and gardens to direction sought
from his well-known taste and feeling. As to works of art, his criticism
was not that of one versed in the history of the schools, but, always
proceeding upon first principles, the 'prima philosophia,' as he called
it; and it was, as it appeared to me, of the highest order.

He was a very great admirer of _Virgil_, not so much as a creative poet,
but as the most consummate master of language, that, perhaps, ever
existed. From him, and Horace, who was an especial favourite, and
Lucretius, he used to quote much.[265]

[265] _Memoirs_, ii. 467-83.

       *       *       *       *       *



(_g_) ON THE DEATH OF COLERIDGE.

The death of Coleridge was announced to us by his friend Wordsworth. It
was the Sunday evening after the event occurred that my brother and I
walked over to the Mount, where we found the Poet alone. One of the
first things we heard from him was the death of one who had been, he
said, his friend for more than thirty years. He then continued to speak
of him; called him the most _wonderful_ man that he had ever
known--wonderful for the originality of his mind, and the power he
possessed of throwing out in profusion grand central truths from which
might be evolved the most comprehensive systems. Wordsworth, as a poet,
regretted that German metaphysics had so much captivated the taste of
Coleridge, for he was frequently not intelligible on this subject;
whereas, if his energy and his originality had been more exerted in the
channel of poetry, an instrument of which he had so perfect a mastery,
Wordsworth thought he might have done more permanently to enrich the
literature, and to influence the thought of the nation, than any man of
the age. As it was, however, he said he believed Coleridge's mind to
have been a widely fertilising one, and that the seed he had so lavishly
sown in his conversational discourses, and the Sibylline leaves (not the
poems so called by him) which he had scattered abroad so extensively
covered with his annotations, had done much to form the opinions of the
highest-educated men of the day; although this might be an influence not
likely to meet with adequate recognition. After mentioning, in answer to
our inquiries about the circumstances of their friendship, that though a
considerable period had elapsed during which they had not seen much of
each other, Coleridge and he had been, for more than two years,
uninterruptedly, in as close intimacy as man could be with man, he
proceeded to read to us the letter from Henry Nelson Coleridge which
conveyed the tidings of his great relation's death, and of the manner of
it. It appeared that, his death was a relief from intense pain, which,
however, subsided at the interval of a few days before the event; and
that shortly after this cessation of agony, he fell into a comatose
state. The most interesting part of the letter was the statement, that
the last use he made of his faculties was to call his children and other
relatives and friends around him, to give them his blessing, and to
express his hope to them that the manner of his end might manifest the
depth of his trust in his Saviour Christ. As I heard this, I was at once
deeply glad at the substance, and deeply affected by Wordsworth's
emotion in reading it. When he came to this part his voice at first
faltered, and then broke; but soon divine faith that the change was a
blest one overcame aught of human grief, and he concluded in an equable
though subdued tone. Before I quit this subject, I will tell you what I
was interested in hearing from a person of the highest abilities,[266]
whom I had the good fortune of meeting at Rydal Mount. He said that he
had visited Coleridge about a month before his death, and had perceived
at once his countenance pervaded by a most remarkable serenity. On being
congratulated on his appearance, Coleridge replied that he did now, for
the first time, begin to hope, from the mitigation of his pains, that
his health was undergoing a permanent improvement (alas! he was
deceived; yet may we not consider this hopeful feeling, which is, I
believe, by no means uncommon, to be under such circumstances a valuable
blessing?); but that what he felt most thankful for was the deep, calm
peace of mind which he then enjoyed; a peace such as he had never before
experienced, or scarcely hoped for. This, he said, seemed now settled
upon him; and all things were thus looked at by him through an
atmosphere by which all were _reconciled and harmonised_.[267]

[266] Dr. Whewell. G.

[267] Extract of a letter to a friend, by Rev. R.P. Graves, M.A.,
formerly of Windermere, now of Dublin: _Memoirs_, pp. 288-90.


(_h_) FURTHER REMINISCENCES OF WORDSWORTH BY THE SAME, SENT TO THE
PRESENT EDITOR.

I remember to have been very much struck by what appeared to me the
wisdom of a plan suggested by Wordsworth, for the revision of the
authorised version of the Bible and of the Book of Common Prayer.

With regard to the former, no one, he said, could be more deeply
convinced of the inestimable value of its having been made when it was,
and being what it is. In his opinion it was made at the happy juncture
when our language had attained adequate expansion and flexibility, and
when at the same time its idiomatic strength was unimpaired by excess of
technical distinctions and conventional refinements; and these
circumstances, though of course infinitely subordinate to the spiritual
influence of its subject-matter, he considered to be highly important in
connection with a volume which naturally became a universally recognised
standard of the language; for thus the fresh well of English undefiled
was made a perennial blessing to the nation, in no slight degree
conducive to the robust and manly thinking and character of its
inhabitants. He was satisfied, too, as to its general and most impartial
accuracy, and its faithfulness in rendering not only the words but the
style, the strength, and the spirit and the character of the original
records. He attached too the value one might suppose he would attach to
the desirableness of leaving undisturbed the sacred associations which
to the feelings of aged Christians belonged to the _ipsissima verba_
which had been their support under the trials of life.

And so with regard to the Prayer Book, he reverenced and loved it as the
Church's precious heritage of primitive piety, equally admirable for its
matter and its style. It may be interesting to add, that in reference to
this latter point I have heard him pronounce that many of the collects
seemed to him examples of perfection, consisting, according to his
impression, of words whose signification filled up without excess or
defect the simple and symmetrical contour of some majestic meaning, and
whose sound was a harmony of accordant simplicity and grandeur; a
combination, he added, such as we enjoy in some of the best passages of
Shakespeare.

But notwithstanding that he held these opinions, which will evince that
he was not one who would lightly touch either sacred volume, he did not
think that plain mistakes in the translation of the Bible, or obsolete
words, or renderings commonly misunderstood, should be perpetually
handed down in our authorised version of the volume of inspiration, or
that similar blemishes in the Prayer Book, which, as being of human
composition, would admit of freer though still reverential handling,
should be permitted to continue as stumbling-blocks interfering with its
acceptableness and usefulness.

The plan which he suggested as meeting the difficulties of the case was
the following:

That by proper authority a Committee of Revision of the English Bible
should be appointed, whose business should be, retaining the present
authorised version as a standard to be departed from as little as
possible to settle upon such indubitable corrections of meaning and
improvements of expression as they agreed ought to be made, and have
these printed _in the margin_ of all Bibles published by authority.
That, as an essential part of the scheme, this Committee of Revision
should be renewed periodically, but not too frequently--he appeared to
think that periods of fifty years might serve--at which times it should
be competent to the Committee to authorise the transference from the
margin into the text of all such alterations as had stood the test of
experience and criticism during the previous period, as well as to fix
on new marginal readings.

He was of opinion that in the constitution of the Committee care should
be taken to appoint not only divines of established reputation for sound
theology, and especially for their knowledge in connection with the
original languages of the sacred volume, but some one author at least
noted for his mastery over the vernacular language.

It will be seen that this plan, while it provides for corrections of
errors and substitution of understood for obsolete or mistaken
expressions, leaves undisturbed the associations of aged Christians, and
prepares the younger generation for receiving the marginal amendments
into the text. Wordsworth conceived that fixing the duration of the
period of revision was of great consequence, both as obviating all
agitation in the way of call for such a process, and as tending in the
matter of critical discussions respecting the sanctioning, cancelling,
and proposing of amendments to bring them to something of definitiveness
in preparation for each era of revision.

The same process, under certain modifications, he thought applicable to
the Book of Common Prayer. In this he deprecated all tampering with
doctrine, considering that alterations ought to be confined to changes
rendering the services more clearly understood or more conveniently
used. It is fair to add, however, that I have heard him express a strong
desire that the Athanasian Creed were rid of the so-called damnatory
clauses; at the same time declaring that no one was ever more profoundly
convinced than himself of the truth of the doctrine of the Trinity.

He was in favour of a collection of metrical hymns, more peculiarly
Christian in character than the Psalter, being set forth by authority
for use in the Church; and for the choice of such hymns he thought a
Committee should be appointed in which the knowledge of divine, of poet,
and of laymen trusted for common sense and experience in life should be
severally and conjointly engaged. As a practical suggestion of moment in
the _composition_ of such hymns he advised that composers should not in
the four-line stanza do more than make the second and fourth lines
rhyme; leaving the other two unrhymed, he said, would give an important
addition of freedom both to the sense and the style.

R.P. GRAVES. Windermere, 1850.

To the above memorandum I now (Sept. 1874) add two items, of which I
retain a distinct remembrance.

(1) He was in favour of the officiating clergyman being allowed to
introduce into his reading of the Lessons in church the authorised
marginal corrections.

(2) He expressed in very strong terms his opinion that the prefatory
portion of the Marriage Service should be altered so as to make it not
only less repulsive to modern feelings, but more accordant with the
higher aspects of the union to be solemnised.

_Passion in Poetry_.--One day, speaking of passion as an element of
poetry, he referred to his own poems, and said that he thought there was
a stronger fire of passion than was elsewhere to be found among them in
the lyrical burst near the conclusion of 'The Song at the Feast of
Brougham Castle:'

    'Armour rusting in his halls,
    On the blood of Clifford calls:
    "Quell the Scot," exclaims the Lance--
    "Bear me to the heart of France,"
    Is the longing of the Shield.'

_Chronological Classification of Poems_.--Many years ago I expressed to
Wordsworth a wish that his poems were printed in the order of their
composition, assigning as reasons for the wish the great interest which
would attach to observing the progressive development of the poet's
thought, and the interpretative value of the light mutually reflected by
poems of the same period. I remember being surprised by the feeling akin
to indignation which he manifested at the suggestion. He said that such
proceeding would indicate on the part of a poet an amount of egotism,
placing interest in himself above interest in the subjects treated by
him, which could not belong to a true poet caring for the elements of
poetry in their right proportion, and designing to bring to bear upon
the minds of his readers the best influences at his command in the way
best calculated to make them effectual. I felt that his ground of
objection made me revere him the more both as a man and as a poet; yet I
retained the opinion that much might be said on the reader's part in the
case of a great poet for such an arrangement of his poems as I had been
suggesting, and I welcomed in after-days the concession made by him in
consenting to put dates to the poems, while adhering to their
classification according to subject or predominant element.

_Verbal Criticism_.--Wordsworth not only sympathised with the feelings
expressed in Southey's touching lines upon The Dead, but admired very
much the easy flow of the verse and the perfect freedom from strain in
the expression by which they are marked. Yet in the first two stanzas he
noted three flaws, and suggested changes by which they might have been
easily avoided. I have underlined the words he took exception to:

    'My days among the dead are past;
    Around me I behold,

    Where'er _these casual eyes_ are cast,
        The mighty minds of old;
    My never-failing friends are they,
    With whom I _converse_ day by day.

    With them I take delight in weal,
        And seek relief in woe;
    And while I understand and feel
        How much to them I owe,
    My cheeks have often been bedew'd
    With tears of thoughtful gratitude.'

In the first stanza, for 'Where'er _these casual eyes_ are cast,' which
he objected to as not simple and natural, and as scarcely correct, he
suggested 'Where'er _a casual look I cast_;' and for '_converse_,' the
accent of which he condemned as belonging to the noun and not to the
verb, he suggested '_commune_.' In the second stanza he pointed out the
improper sequence of tenses in the third and fifth lines, which he
corrected by reading in the latter '_My cheeks are oftentimes bedew'd_.'
Of the narrative poems of his friend, well executed as he considered
them, and of the mainly external action of imagination or fancy in which
they deal, I have certainly heard him pronounce a very depreciatory
opinion; whether I ever heard him use the hard words attributed to him,
'I would not give five shillings for a ream of them,' I cannot now
assert, but if used, they were said in reference to the nobler kind of
imaginative power which reveals to man the deep places and sublimer
affinities of his own being. But to some others of Southey's verses, as
well as to the lines above quoted, and to his prose writings in general,
he was wont to give liberal praise; and no one could doubt the sincerity
and warmth of his admiration of the intellect and virtues of the man, or
the brotherly affection towards him which he not unfrequently expressed.

R.P. GRAVES. Dublin, 1875.


(i) AN AMERICAN'S REMINISCENCES.

To PROFESSOR HENRY REED.

                   Philadelphia, Sept. 1850.

MY DEAR FRIEND,

You have asked me to write out as fully as I can an account of my visit
to Wordsworth last Summer, of which your letter of introduction was the
occasion. Feeling very grateful to you for the pleasure which that visit
gave me, and desiring to make a more minute record of it than either the
letter I addressed to you from Keswick, or my journal written at the
time contains, I gladly comply with your request.

It was about noon on the 18th of August 1849, that I set out with my
friends, from their house near Bowness, to ride to Ambleside. Our route
was along the shore of Lake Windermere. It was my first day among the
English Lakes, and I enjoyed keenly the loveliness which was spread out
before me. My friends congratulated me on the clearness of the
atmosphere and the bright skies. Twilight is all-important in bringing
out the full beauty of the Lake Region, and in this respect I was very
fortunate. I had already been deeply moved by the tranquil beauty of
Windermere, for, as I came out of the cottage, formerly Professor
Wilson's, where I had passed the night, there it lay in all its
grandeur, its clear waters, its green islands, and its girdle of solemn
mountains. It was quite dark when I had been conducted to this cottage
the night before, so that I saw the Lake for the first time in the light
of early morning. The first impression was confirmed by every new
prospect as we rode along. The vale seemed a very paradise for its sweet
seclusion. I had been told that after Switzerland, I should find little
to attract me in this region, but such was not the case. Nothing can be
more lovely than these lakes and mountains, the latter thickly wooded,
and rising directly from the water's edge. The foliage is of the darkest
green, giving to the lake in which it is reflected the same sombre hue.
It seemed the fittest dwelling-place for a Poet, amid all this quiet
beauty.

It was half-past one when we reached Ambleside, where I left Mr. and
Mrs. B., and walked on alone to Rydal Mount. I was full of eager
expectations as I thought how soon I should, perhaps, be in the presence
of Wordsworth--that after long years of waiting, of distant reverential
admiration and love, I was, as I hoped, to be favoured with a personal
interview with the great poet-philosopher, to whom you and I, and so
many, many others, feel that we are under the deepest obligation for the
good which has come to us from his writings. At two o'clock I was at the
wicket gate opening into Wordsworth's grounds. I walked along the gravel
pathway, leading through shrubbery to the open space in front of the
long two-story cottage, the Poet's dwelling. Your sketch of the house by
Inman is a correct one, but it gives no idea of the view _from_ it,
which is its chief charm. Rydal Mere with its islands, and the mountains
beyond it, are all in sight. I had but a hasty enjoyment of this beauty;
nor could I notice carefully the flowers which were blooming around. It
was evident that the greatest attention had been paid to the grounds,
for the flower-beds were tastefully arranged, and the gravel walks were
in complete order. One might be well content, I thought, to make his
abode at a spot like this.

A boy of about twelve years was occupied at one of the flower-beds, as I
passed by; he followed me to the door, and waited my commands. I asked
if Mr. Wordsworth was in.... He was dining--would I walk into the
drawing-room, and wait a short time?... I was shown into the
drawing-room, or study, I know not which to call it.... Here I am, I
said to myself, in the great Poet's house. Here his daily life is spent.
Here in this room, doubtless, much of his poetry has been written--words
of power which are to go down with those of Shakspeare, and Spenser, and
Milton, while our English tongue endures. It was a long apartment, the
ceiling low, with two windows at one end, looking out on the lawn and
shrubbery. Many engravings were on the walls. The famous Madonna of
Raphael, known as that of the Dresden Gallery, hung directly over the
fire-place. Inman's portrait of the Poet, your gift to Mrs. Wordsworth,
being a copy of the one painted for you, had a conspicuous place. The
portrait of Bishop White, also your gift (the engraving from Inman's
picture), I also noticed.

       *       *       *       *       *

I could have waited patiently for a long time indulging the thoughts
which the place called up. In a few minutes, however, I heard steps in
the entry, the door was opened, and Wordsworth came in, it could be no
other--- a tall figure, a little bent with age, his hair thin and grey,
and his face deeply wrinkled.... The expression of his countenance was
sad, mournful I might say; he seemed one on whom sorrow pressed heavily.
He gave me his hand, and welcomed me cordially, though without smiling.
'Will you walk out, Sir, and join us at the table?' said he. 'I am
engaged to dine elsewhere.' 'But you can sit with us,' said he; so,
leading the way, he conducted me to the dining-room. At the head of the
table sat Mrs. Wordsworth, and their three grandchildren made up the
party.... It was a humble apartment, not ceiled, the rafters being
visible; having a large old-fashioned chimney-place, with a high
mantelpiece.

       *       *       *       *       *

Wordsworth asked after Mr. Ticknor of Boston, who had visited him a few
months before, and for whom he expressed much regard. Some other
questions led me to speak of the progress we were making in America in
the extension of our territory, the settlements on the Pacific, &c.; all
this involving the rapid spread of our English tongue. Wordsworth at
this looked up, and I noticed a fixing of his eye as if on some remote
object. He said that considering this extension of our language, it
behoved those who wrote to see to it, that what they put forth was on
the side of virtue. This remark, although thrown out at the moment, was
made in a serious thoughtful way; and I was much impressed by it. I
could not but reflect that to him a deep sense of responsibility had
ever been present: to purify and elevate has been the purpose of all his
writings. Such may have been at that moment his own inward meditation,
and he may have had in mind the coming generations who are to dwell upon
his words.

       *       *       *       *       *

Queen Victoria was mentioned--her visit to Ireland which had just been
made--the courage she had shown. 'That is a virtue,' said he, 'which she
has to a remarkable degree, which is very much to her credit.'

       *       *       *       *       *

Inman's portrait of him I alluded to as being very familiar to me, the
copy which hung in the room calling it to mind, which led him to speak
of the one painted by Pickersgill for St. John's College, Cambridge. 'I
was a member of that College, he said, 'and the fellows and students
did me the honour to ask me to sit, and allowed me to choose the artist.
I wrote to Mr. Rogers on the subject, and he recommended Pickersgill,
who came down soon afterwards, and the picture was painted here.' He
believed he had sat twenty-three times. My impression is he was in doubt
whether Inman's or Pickersgill's portrait was the better one.

       *       *       *       *       *

He spoke with great animation of the advantage of classical study, Greek
especially. 'Where,' said he, 'would one look for a greater orator than
Demosthenes; or finer dramatic poetry, next to Shakspeare, than that of
Aeschylus and Sophocles, not to speak of Euripides?' Herodotus he
thought 'the most interesting and instructive book, next to the Bible,
which had ever been written.' Modern discoveries had only tended to
confirm the general truth of his narrative. Thucydides he thought less
of.

       *       *       *       *       *

France was our next subject, and one which seemed very near his heart.
He had been much in that country at the out-break of the Revolution, and
afterwards during its wildest excesses. At the time of the September
massacres he was at Orleans. Addressing Mrs. W. he said, 'I wonder how I
came to stay there so long, and at a period so exciting.' He had known
many of the abbés and other ecclesiastics, and thought highly of them as
a class; they were earnest, faithful men: being unmarried, he must say,
they were the better able to fulfil their sacred duties; they were
married to their flocks. In the towns there seemed, he admitted, very
little religion; but in the country there had always been a great deal.
'I should like to spend another month in France,' he said, 'before I
close my eyes.' He seemed to feel deep commiseration for the sorrows of
that unhappy country. It was evidently the remembrance of hopes which in
his youth he had ardently cherished, and which had been blighted, on
which his mind was dwelling. I alluded to Henry the Fifth, to whom many
eyes were, I thought, beginning to turn. With him, he remarked, there
would be a principle for which men could contend--legitimacy. The
advantage of this he stated finely.

There was tenderness, I thought, in the tones of his voice, when
speaking with his wife; and I could not but look with deep interest and
admiration on the woman for whom this illustrious man had for so many
years cherished feelings of reverential love.

    'Peace settles where the intellect is meek,'

is a line which you will recall from one of the beautiful poems
Wordsworth has addressed to her; and this seemed peculiarly the temper
of her spirit--_peace_, the holy calmness of a heart to whom love had
been an 'unerring light.' Surely we may pray, my friend, that in the
brief season of separation which she has now to pass, she may be
strengthened with divine consolation.

I cannot forbear to quote here that beautiful passage, near the end of
the great poem, 'The Prelude,' as an utterance by the author of tender
feelings in his own matchless way. After speaking of his sister in tones
of deepest thankfulness, he adds,

                         'Thereafter came
    One, whom with thee friendship had early prized;
    She came, no more a phantom to adorn
    A moment, but an inmate of the heart;
    And yet a spirit, there for me enshrined,
    To penetrate the lofty and the low;
    Even as one essence of pervading light
    Shines in the brightness of ten thousand stars,
    And the meek worm that feeds her lonely lamp
    Couched in the dewy grass.'

I have been led away from my narrative; but I wished to record the
feelings which had arisen within me with regard to this excellent lady;
she who has been, as ---- has so happily expressed it in his letter to
you, 'almost like the Poet's guardian angel for near fifty years.'

       *       *       *       *       *

I may here mention, that throughout the conversation Wordsworth's manner
was animated, and that he took pleasure in it evidently. His words were
very choice: each sentence seemed faultless. No one could have listened
to his talk for five minutes, even on ordinary topics, without
perceiving that he was a remarkable man. Not that he was brilliant; but
there was sustained vigour, and that mode of expression which denotes
habitual thoughtfulness.

When the clock struck four, I thought it time for me to go. Wordsworth
told me to say to his friends in America, that he and his wife were
well; that they had had a great grief of late, in the loss of their only
daughter, which he supposed they would never get over. This explained,
as I have already mentioned, the sadness of his manner. Such strength of
the affections in old age we rarely see. And yet the Poet has himself
condemned, as you remember, in 'The Excursion,' long and persevering
grief for objects of our love 'removed from this unstable world,'
reminding one so sorrowing of

                              'that state
    Of pure, imperishable blessedness
    Which reason promises, and Holy Writ
    Ensures to all believers.'

But, as if foreseeing his own case, he has added, with touching power,

    'And if there be whose tender frames have drooped
    Even to the dust, apparently through weight
    Of anguish unrelieved, and lack of power
    An agonising sorrow to transmute;
    Deem not that proof is here of hope withheld
    When wanted most; a confidence impaired
    So pitiably, that having ceased to see
    With bodily eyes, they are borne down by love
    Of what is lost, and perish through regret.'

The weakness of his bodily frame it was which took away his power of
tranquil endurance. Bowed down by the weight of years, he had not
strength to sustain this further burden, grief for a much-loved child.
His mind, happily, retained its clearness, though his body was decaying.

       *       *       *       *       *

He walked out into the entry with me, and then asked me to go again into
the dining-room, to look at an oak chest or cabinet he had there--a
piece of old furniture curiously carved. It bore a Latin inscription,
which stated that it was made 300 years ago, for William Wordsworth, who
was the son of, &c. &c. giving the ancestors of said William for many
generations, and ending, 'on whose souls may God have mercy.' This
Wordsworth repeated twice, and in an emphatic way, as he read the
inscription. It seemed to me that he took comfort in the religious
spirit of his ancestors, and that he was also adopting the solemn
ejaculation for himself. There was something very impressive in his
manner.

I asked to see the cast from Chantrey's bust of him, which he at once
showed me; also a crayon sketch by Haydon, which, I understood him to
say, West had pronounced the finest crayon he had ever seen. He referred
also to another sketch, by Margaret Gillies, I think, which was there.

We then went out together on the lawn, and stood for a while to enjoy
the views, and he pulled open the shrubbery or hedge in places, that I
might see to better advantage. He accompanied me to the gate, and then
said if I had a few minutes longer to spare he would like to show me the
waterfall which was close by--the lower fall of Rydal. I gladly
assented, and he led the way across the grounds of Lady Fleming, which
were opposite to his own, to a small summer-house. The moment we opened
the door, the waterfall was before us; the summer-house being so placed
as to occupy the exact spot from which it was to be seen; the rocks and
shrubbery around closing it in on every side. The effect was magical.
The view from the rustic house, the rocky basin into which the water
fell, and the deep shade in which the whole was enveloped, made it a
lovely scene. Wordsworth seemed to have much pleasure in exhibiting this
beautiful retreat; it is described in one of his earlier poems, 'The
Evening Walk.'

As we returned together he walked very slowly, occasionally stopping
when he said anything of importance; and again I noticed that looking
into remote space of which I have already spoken. His eyes, though not
glistening, had yet in them the fire which betokened the greatness of
his genius. This no painter could represent, and this it was which gave
to his countenance its high intellectual expression.

       *       *       *       *       *

Hartley Coleridge he spoke of with affection.... 'There is a single
line,' he added, 'in one of his father's poems which I consider explains
the after-life of the son. He is speaking of his own confinement in
London, and then says,

    "But thou, my child, shalt wander like a breeze."

       *       *       *       *       *

Of Southey he said that he had had the misfortune to outlive his
faculties. His mind, he thought, had been weakened by long watching by
the sick-bed of his wife, who had lingered for years in a very
distressing state.

The last subject he touched on was the international copyright
question--the absence of protection in our country to the works of
foreign authors. He said, mildly, that he thought it would be better
_for us_ if some acknowledgment, however small, was made. The fame of
his own writings, as far as it was of pecuniary advantage to him, he had
long regarded with indifference; happily, he had an income more than
sufficient for all his wants.... He remarked, he had once seen a volume
of his poems published in an American newspaper.

I happened to have in my pocket the small volume of selections, which
you made some years ago. I produced it, and asked at the same time if he
had ever seen it. He replied he had not. He took it with evident
interest, turned to the title-page, which he read, with its motto. He
began the preface then, in the same way. But here I must record a
trifling incident, which may yet be worth noting. We were standing
together in the road, Wordsworth reading aloud, as I have said, when a
man accosted us asking charity--a beggar of the better class.
Wordsworth, scarcely looking off the book, thrust his hands into his
pockets, as if instinctively acknowledging the man's right to beg by
this prompt action. He seemed to find nothing, however; and he said, in
a sort of soliloquy, 'I have given to four or five, already, to-day,' as
if to account for his being then unprovided.

Wordsworth, as he turned over one leaf after another, said, 'But I shall
weary you, sir.' 'By no means,' said I; for I could have been content to
stand there for hours to hear, as I did, the Poet read from time to
time, with fitting emphasis, the choice passages which your preface and
biographical sketch contain. Imagine with what delight I listened to the
venerable man, and to hear, too, from his own lips, such words as these,
your own most true reflection: '_His has been a life devoted to the
cultivation of the poet's art for its best and most lasting uses--a
self-dedication as complete as the world has ever witnessed_.' Your
remark with regard to his having outlived many of his contemporaries
among the poets, he read with affecting simplicity; his manner being
that of one who looked backward to the past with entire tranquillity,
and forward with sure hope. I felt that his honoured life was drawing
rapidly to a close, and with him there was evidently the same
consciousness.

He made but little comment on your notice of him. Occasionally he would
say, as he came to a particular fact, 'That's quite correct;' or, after
reading a quotation from his own works, he would add, 'That's from my
writings.' These quotations he read in a way that much impressed me; it
seemed almost as if he was awed by the greatness of his own power, the
gifts with which he had been endowed. It was a solemn time to me, this
part of my interview; and to you, my friend, it would have been a
crowning happiness to stand, as I did, by his side on that bright summer
day, and thus listen to his voice. I thought of his long life; that he
was one who had felt himself from early youth 'a renovated spirit
singled out for holy services'--one who had listened to the teachings of
Nature, and communed with his own heart in the seclusion of those
beautiful vales, until his thoughts were ready to be uttered for the
good of his fellow-men. And there had come back to him offerings of
love, and gratitude, and reverent admiration, from a greater multitude
than had ever before paid their homage to a living writer; and these
acknowledgments have been for benefits so deep and lasting, that words
seem but a poor return. But I will not attempt to describe further the
feelings which were strongly present to me at that moment, when I seemed
most to realise in whose presence I stood.

       *       *       *       *       *

He walked with me as far as the main road to Ambleside. As we passed the
little chapel built by Lady Fleming, which has been the occasion, as you
remember, of one of his poems, there were persons, tourists evidently,
talking with the sexton at the door. Their inquiries, I fancied, were
about Wordsworth, perhaps as to the hour of service the next day
(Sunday), with the hope of seeing him there. One of them caught sight of
the venerable man at the moment, and at once seemed to perceive who it
was, for she motioned to the others to look, and they watched him with
earnest gaze. I was struck with their looks of delighted admiration. He
stopped when we reached the main road, saying that his strength would
not allow him to walk further. Giving me his hand, he desired again to
be remembered to you and others in America, and wished me a safe return
to my friends, and so we parted. I went on my way, happy in the
recollection of this, to me, memorable interview. My mind was in a
tumult of excitement, for I felt that I had been in the familiar
presence of one of the noblest of our race; and this sense of
Wordsworth's intellectual greatness had been with me during the whole
interview. I may speak, too, of the strong perception of his moral
elevation which I had at the same time. No word of unkindness had fallen
from him. He seemed to be living as if in the presence of God, by
habitual recollection. A strange feeling, almost of awe, had impressed
me while I was thus with him. Believing that his memory will be had in
honour in all coming time, I could not but be thankful that I had been
admitted to intimate intercourse with him then, when he was so near the
end of life. To you, my dear friend, I must again say I owe this
happiness, and to you it has been denied. You also, of all others of our
countrymen, would have most valued such an interview, for to you the
great Poet's heart has been in an especial manner opened in private
correspondence. No other American has he honoured in the same degree;
and by no one else in this country has the knowledge and appreciation of
his poetry been so much extended. The love which has so long animated
you has been such, that multitudes have been influenced to seek for joy
and refreshment from the same pure source.

I have been led, as I said at the beginning of my letter, to make this
record, partly from your suggestion, and partly from a remark of Southey
which I have lately seen, to the effect that Wordsworth was one of whom
posterity would desire to know all that can be remembered. You will not,
I trust, deem the incidents I have set down trivial; or consider any
detail too minute, the object of which was only to bring the living man
before you. Now that he has gone for ever from our sight in this world,
I am led to look back to the interview with a deeper satisfaction; and
it may be that this full account of it will have value hereafter. To you
it was due that I should make the record; by myself these remembrances
will ever be cherished among my choicest possessions.

Believe me, my dear friend, yours faithfully,

Ellis Yarnall.[268]

[268] _Memoirs_, ii. 483-500.




(j) RECOLLECTIONS OF WORDSWORTH.

By Aubrey de Vere, Esq.

_(Sent to the present Editor, and now first published)_


PART I.

It was about eight years before his death that I had the happiness of
making acquaintance with Wordsworth. During the next four years I saw a
good deal of him, chiefly among his own mountains, and, besides many
delightful walks with him, I had the great honour of passing some days
under his roof. The strongest of my impressions respecting him was that
made by the manly simplicity, and lofty rectitude, which characterised
him. In one of his later sonnets he writes of himself thus: 'As a true
man who long had served the lyre:'--it was because he was a _true_ man
that he was a true poet; and it was impossible to know him without being
reminded of this. In any case he must have been recognised as a man of
original and energetic genius; but it was his strong and truthful moral
nature, his intellectual sincerity, the abiding conscientiousness of his
imagination, which enabled that genius to do its great work, and
bequeath to the England of the future the most solid mass of
deep-hearted and authentic poetry which has been the gift to her of any
poet since the Elizabethan age. There was in his nature a veracity,
which, had it not been combined with an idealising imagination not less
remarkable, would to many have appeared prosaic; yet, had he not
possessed that characteristic, the products of his imagination would
have lacked reality. They might still have enunciated a deep and sound
philosophy; but they would have been divested of that human interest
which belongs to them in a yet higher degree. All the little incidents
of the neighbourhood were to him important.

The veracity and the ideality which are so signally combined in
Wordsworth's poetic descriptions of Nature, made themselves at least as
much felt whenever Nature was the theme of his discourse. In his intense
reverence for Nature he regarded all poetical delineations of her with
an exacting severity; and if the descriptions were not true, and true in
a twofold sense, the more skilfully executed they were, the more was his
indignation roused by what he deemed a pretence and a deceit. An untrue
description of Nature was to him a profaneness, a heavenly message
sophisticated and falsely delivered. He expatiated much to me one day,
as we walked among the hills above Grasmere, on the mode in which Nature
had been described by one of the most justly popular of England's modern
poets--one for whom he preserved a high and affectionate respect. 'He
took pains,' Wordsworth said; 'he went out with his pencil and
note-book, and jotted down whatever struck him most--a river rippling
over the sands, a ruined tower on a rock above it, a promontory, and a
mountain ash waving its red berries. He went home, and wove the whole
together into a poetical description.' After a pause, Wordsworth resumed
with a flashing eye and impassioned voice, 'But Nature does not permit
an inventory to be made of her charms! He should have left his pencil
and note-book at home; fixed his eye, as he walked, with a reverent
attention on all that surrounded him, and taken all into a heart that
could understand and enjoy. Then, after several days had passed by, he
should have interrogated his memory as to the scene. He would have
discovered that while much of what he had admired was preserved to him,
much was also most wisely obliterated. That which remained--the picture
surviving in his mind--would have presented the ideal and essential
truth of the scene, and done so, in a large part, by discarding much
which, though in itself striking, was not characteristic. In every scene
many of the most brilliant details are but accidental. A true eye for
Nature does not note them, or at least does not dwell on them.' On the
same occasion he remarked, 'Scott misquoted in one of his novels my
lines on _Yarrow_. He makes me write,

    "The swans on sweet St. Mary's lake
    Float double, swans and shadow;"

but I wrote

    "The _swan_ on _still_ St. Mary's lake."

Never could I have written "swans" in the plural. The scene when I saw
it, with its still and dim lake, under the dusky hills, was one of utter
loneliness: there was _one_ swan, and one only, stemming the water, and
the pathetic loneliness of the region gave importance to the one
companion of that swan, its own white image in the water. It was for
that reason that I recorded the Swan and the Shadow. Had there been many
swans and many shadows, they would have implied nothing as regards the
character of the scene; and I should have said nothing about them.' He
proceeded to remark that many who could descant with eloquence on Nature
cared little for her, and that many more who truly loved her had yet no
eye to discern her--which he regarded as a sort of 'spiritual
discernment.' He continued, 'Indeed I have hardly ever known any one but
myself who had a true eye for Nature, one that thoroughly understood her
meanings and her teachings--except' (here he interrupted himself) 'one
person. There was a young clergyman, called Frederick Faber,[269] who
resided at Ambleside. He had not only as good an eye for Nature as I
have, but even a better one, and sometimes pointed out to me on the
mountains effects which, with all my great experience, I had never
detected.'

[269] Afterwards Father Faber of the Oratory. His 'Sir Launcelot'
abounds in admirable descriptions.

Truth, he used to say--that is, truth in its largest sense, as a thing
at once real and ideal, a truth including exact and accurate detail, and
yet everywhere subordinating mere detail to the spirit of the
whole--this, he affirmed, was the soul and essence not only of
descriptive poetry, but of all poetry. He had often, he told me,
intended to write an essay on poetry, setting forth this principle, and
illustrating it by references to the chief representatives of poetry in
its various departments. It was this twofold truth which made Shakspeare
the greatest of all poets. 'It was well for Shakspeare,' he remarked,
'that he gave himself to the drama. It was that which forced him to be
sufficiently human. His poems would otherwise, from the extraordinarily
metaphysical character of his genius, have been too recondite to be
understood. His youthful poems, in spite of their unfortunate and
unworthy subjects, and his sonnets also, reveal this tendency. Nothing
can surpass the greatness of Shakspeare where he is at his greatest; but
it is wrong to speak of him as if even he were perfect. He had serious
defects, and not those only proceeding from carelessness. For instance,
in his delineations of character he does not assign as large a place to
religious sentiment as enters into the constitution of human nature
under normal circumstances. If his dramas had more religion in them,
they would be truer representations of man, as well as more elevated,
and of a more searching interest.' Wordsworth used to warn young poets
against writing poetry remote from human interest. Dante he admitted to
be an exception; but he considered that Shelley, and almost all others
who had endeavoured to out-soar the humanities, had suffered deplorably
from the attempt. I once heard him say, 'I have often been asked for
advice by young poets. All the advice I can give may be expressed in two
counsels. First, let Nature be your habitual and pleasurable study,
human nature and material nature; secondly, study carefully those
first-class poets whose fame is universal, not local, and learn from
them: learn from them especially how to observe and how to interpret
Nature.'

Those who knew Wordsworth only from his poetry might have supposed that
he dwelt ever in a region too serene to admit of human agitations. This
was not the fact. There was in his being a region of tumult as well as a
higher region of calm, though it was almost wholly in the latter that
his poetry lived. It turned aside from mere _personal_ excitements; and
for that reason, doubtless, it developed more deeply those special
ardours which belong at once to the higher imagination and to the moral
being. The passion which was suppressed elsewhere burned in his 'Sonnets
to Liberty,' and added a deeper sadness to the 'Yew-trees of
Borrowdale.' But his heart, as well as his imagination, was ardent. When
it spoke most powerfully in his poetry it spoke with a stern brevity
unusual in that poetry, as in the poem 'There is a change and I am
poor,' and the still more remarkable one, 'A slumber did my spirit
seal,' a poem impassioned beyond the comprehension of those who fancy
that Wordsworth lacks passion, merely because in him passion is neither
declamatory nor, latently, sensual. He was a man of strong affections,
strong enough on one sorrowful occasion to withdraw him for a time from
poetry.[270]

[270] 'For us the stream of fiction ceased to flow' (Dedicatory Stanzas
to 'The White Doe of Rylstone').

Referring once to two young children of his who had died about forty
years previously, he described the details of their illnesses with an
exactness and an impetuosity of troubled excitement, such as might have
been expected if the bereavement had taken place but a few weeks before.
The lapse of time appeared to have left the sorrow submerged indeed, but
still in all its first freshness. Yet I afterwards heard that at the
time of the illness, at least in the case of one of the two children, it
was impossible to rouse his attention to the danger. He chanced to be
then under the immediate spell of one of those fits of poetic
inspiration which descended on him like a cloud. Till the cloud had
drifted he could see nothing beyond. Under the level of the calm there
was, however, the precinct of the storm. It expressed itself rarely but
vehemently, partaking sometimes of the character both of indignation and
sorrow. All at once the trouble would pass away, and his countenance
bask in its habitual calm, like a cloudless summer sky. His indignation
flamed out vehemently when he heard of a base action. 'I could kick such
a man across England with my naked foot,' I heard him exclaim on such an
occasion. The more impassioned part of his nature connected itself
especially with his political feelings. He regarded his own intellect as
one which united some of the faculties which belong to the statesman
with those which belong to the poet; and public affairs interested him
not less deeply than poetry. It was as patriot, not poet, that he
ventured to claim fellowship with Dante.[271] He did not accept the term
'Reformer,' because it implied an organic change in our institutions,
and this he deemed both needless and dangerous; but he used to say that
while he was a decided Conservative, he remembered that to preserve our
institutions we must be ever improving them. He was, indeed, from first
to last, preëminently a patriot, an impassioned as well as a thoughtful
one. Yet his political sympathies were not with his own country only,
but with the progress of Humanity. Till disenchanted by the excesses and
follies of the first French revolution, his hopes and sympathies
associated themselves ardently with the new order of things created by
it; and I have heard him say that he did not know how any
generous-minded _young_ man, entering on life at the time of that great
uprising, could have escaped the illusion. To the end his sympathies
were ever with the cottage hearth far more than with the palace. If he
became a strong supporter of what has been called 'the hierarchy of
society,' it was chiefly because he believed the principle of 'equality'
to be fatal to the well-being and the true dignity of the poor.
Moreover, in siding politically with the Crown and the coronets, he
considered himself to be siding with the weaker party in our democratic
days.

[271] See his Sonnet on the seat of Dante, close to the Duomo at
Florence (_Poems of Early and Late Years_).

The absence of love-poetry in Wordsworth's works has often been
remarked upon, and indeed brought as a charge against them. He once told
me that if he had avoided that form of composition, it was by no means
because the theme did not interest him, but because, treated as it
commonly has been, it tends rather to disturb and lower the reader's
moral and imaginative being than to elevate it. He feared to handle it
amiss. He seemed to think that the subject had been so long vulgarised,
that few poets had a right to assume that they could treat it worthily,
especially as the theme, when treated unworthily, was such an easy and
cheap way of winning applause. It has been observed also that the
Religion of Wordsworth's poetry, at least of his earlier poetry, is not
as distinctly 'Revealed Religion' as might have been expected from this
poet's well-known adherence to what he has called emphatically 'The
lord, and mighty paramount of Truths.' He once remarked to me himself on
this circumstance, and explained it by stating that when in youth his
imagination was shaping for itself the channel in which it was to flow,
his religious convictions were less definite and less strong than they
had become on more mature thought, and that when his poetic mind and
manner had once been formed, he feared that he might, in attempting to
modify them, have become constrained. He added that on such matters he
ever wrote with great diffidence, remembering that if there were many
subjects too low for song, there were some too high. Wordsworth's
general confidence in his own powers, which was strong, though far from
exaggerated, rendered more striking and more touching his humility in
all that concerned Religion. It used to remind me of what I once heard
Mr. Rogers say, viz. 'There is a special character of _greatness_ about
humility for it implies that a man can, in an unusual degree, estimate
the _greatness_ of what is above us.' Fortunately his diffidence did not
keep Wordsworth silent on sacred themes; his later poems include an
unequivocal as well as beautiful confession of Christian faith; and one
of them, 'The Primrose of the Rock,' is as distinctly Wordsworthian in
its inspiration as it is Christian in its doctrine. Wordsworth was a
'high churchman,' and also, in his prose mind, strongly anti-Roman
Catholic, partly on political grounds; but that it was otherwise as
regards his mind poetic is obvious from many passages in his Christian
poetry, especially those which refer to the monastic system, and the
Schoolmen, and his sonnet on the Blessed Virgin, whom he addresses as

    'Our tainted nature's solitary boast.'

He used to say that the idea of one who was both Virgin and Mother had
sunk so deep into the heart of Humanity, that there it must ever remain.

Wordsworth's estimate of his contemporaries was not generally high. I
remember his once saying to me, 'I have known many that might he called
very _clever_ men, and a good many of real and vigorous _abilities_, but
few of genius; and only one whom I should call "wonderful." That one was
Coleridge. At any hour of the day or night he would talk by the hour, if
there chanced to be _any_ sympathetic listener, and talk better than the
best page of his writings; for a pen half paralysed his genius. A child
would sit quietly at his feet and wonder, till the torrent had passed
by. The only man like Coleridge whom I have known is Sir William
Hamilton, Astronomer Royal of Dublin.' I remember, however, that when I
recited by his fireside Alfred Tennyson's two political poems, 'You ask
me why, though ill at ease,' and 'Of old sat Freedom on the heights,'
the old bard listened with a deepening attention, and when I had ended,
said after a pause, 'I must acknowledge that those two poems are very
solid and noble in thought. Their diction also seems singularly
stately.' He was a great admirer of _Philip van Artevelde_. In the case
of a certain poet since dead, and never popular, he said to me, 'I
consider his sonnets to be the best of modern times;' adding, 'Of course
I am not including my own in any comparison with those of others.' He
was not sanguine as to the future of English poetry. He thought that
there was much to be supplied in other departments of our literature,
and especially he desired a really great History of England; but he was
disposed to regard the roll of English poetry as made up, and as leaving
place for little more except what was likely to be eccentric or
imitational.

In his younger days Wordsworth had had to fight a great battle in
poetry, for both his subjects and his mode of treating them were
antagonistic to the maxims then current. It was fortunate for posterity,
no doubt, that his long 'militant estate' was animated by some mingling
of personal ambition with his love of poetry. Speaking in an early
sonnet of

    'The poets, who on earth have made us heirs
    Of truth, and pure delight, by heavenly lays,'

he concludes,

    'Oh! might my name be numbered among theirs,
    Then gladly would I end my mortal days.'

He died at eighty, and general fame did not come to him till about
fifteen years before his death. This perhaps might have been fifteen
years too soon, if he had set any inordinate value on it. But it was not
so. Shelley tells us that' Fame is love disguised;' and it was
intellectual sympathy that Wordsworth had always valued far more than
reputation. 'Give me thy love; I claim no other fee,' had been his
demand on his reader. When Fame had laid her tardy garland at his feet
he found on it no fresher green than his 'Rydalian laurels' had always
worn. Once he said to me, 'It is indeed a deep satisfaction to hope and
believe that my poetry will be, while it lasts, a help to the cause of
virtue and truth--especially among the young. As for myself, it seems
now of little moment how long I may be remembered. When a man pushes off
in his little boat into the great seas of Infinity and Eternity, it
surely signifies little how long he is kept in sight by watchers from
the shore.'

Such are my chief recollections of the great poet, whom I knew but in
his old age, but whose heart retained its youth till his daughter Dora's
death. He seemed to me one who from boyhood had been faithful to a high
vocation; one who had esteemed it his office to minister, in an age of
conventional civilisation, at Nature's altar, and who had in his later
life explained and vindicated such life-long ministration, even while he
seemed to apologise for it, in the memorable confession,

    'But who is innocent? By grace divine,
    Not otherwise, O Nature, are we thine.'[272]

[272] 'Evening Voluntary.'

It was to Nature as first created, not to Nature as corrupted by
'disnatured' passions, that his song had attributed such high and
healing powers. In singing her praise he had chosen a theme loftier than
most of his readers knew--loftier, as he perhaps eventually discovered,
than he had at first supposed it to be. Utterly without Shakspeare's
dramatic faculty, he was richer and wider in the humanities than any
poet since Shakspeare. Wholly unlike Milton in character and in
opinions, he abounds in passages to be paralleled only by Milton in
solemn and spiritual sublimity, and not even by Milton in pathos. It was
plain to those who knew Wordsworth that he had kept his great gift pure,
and used it honestly and thoroughly for that purpose for which it had
been bestowed. He had ever written with a conscientious reverence for
that gift; but he had also written spontaneously. He had composed with
care--not the exaggerated solicitude which is prompted by vanity, and
which frets itself to unite incompatible excellences; but the diligence
which shrinks from no toil while eradicating blemishes that confuse a
poem's meaning, and frustrate its purpose. He regarded poetry as an art;
but he also regarded Art not as the compeer of Nature, much less her
superior, but as her servant and interpreter. He wrote poetry likewise,
no doubt, in a large measure, because self-utterance was an essential
law of his nature. If he had a companion, he discoursed like one whose
thoughts must needs run on in audible current; if he walked alone among
his mountains, he murmured old songs. He was like a pine grove, vocal as
well as visible. But to poetry he had dedicated himself as to the
utterance of the highest truths brought within the range of his life's
experience; and if his poetry has been accused of egotism, the charge
has come from those who did not perceive that it was with a human, not a
mere personal interest that he habitually watched the processes of his
own mind. He drew from the fountain that was nearest at hand what he
hoped might be a refreshment to those far off. He once said, speaking of
a departed man of genius, who had lived an unhappy life and deplorably
abused his powers, to the lasting calamity of his country, 'A great poet
must be a great man; and a great man must be a good man; and a good man
ought to be a happy man.' To know Wordsworth was to feel sure that if he
had been a great poet, it was not merely because he had been endowed
with a great imagination, but because he had been a good man, a great
man, and a man whose poetry had, in an especial sense, been the
expression of a healthily happy moral being.

AUBREY DE VERE.

                   Curragh Chase, March 31, 1875.

P.S. Wordsworth was by no means without humour. When the Queen on one
occasion gave a masked ball, some one said that a certain youthful poet,
who has since reached a deservedly high place both in the literary and
political world, but who was then known chiefly as an accomplished and
amusing young man of society, was to attend it dressed in the character
of the father of English poetry, grave old Chaucer. 'What,' said
Wordsworth, 'M. go as Chaucer! Then it only remains for me to go as M.!'

       *       *       *       *       *




PART II.

SONNET--RYDAL WITH WORDSWORTH.

BY THE LATE SIR AUBREY DE VERE.


    'What we beheld scarce can I now recall
    In one connected picture; images
    Hurrying so swiftly their fresh witcheries
    O'er the mind's mirror, that the several
    Seems lost, or blended in the mighty all.
    Lone lakes; rills gushing through rock-rooted trees:
    Peaked mountains shadowing vales of peacefulness:
    Glens echoing to the flashing waterfall.
    Then that sweet twilight isle! with friends delayed
    Beside a ferny bank 'neath oaks and yews;
    The moon between two mountain peaks embayed;
    Heaven and the waters dyed with sunset hues:
    And he, the Poet of the age and land,
    Discoursing as we wandered hand in hand.'

The above-written sonnet is the record of a delightful day spent by my
father in 1833 with Wordsworth at Rydal, to which he went from the still
more beautiful shores of Ulswater, where he had been sojourning at
Halsteads. He had been one of Wordsworth's warmest admirers, when their
number was small, and in 1842 he dedicated a volume of poems to
him.[273] He taught me when a boy of 18 years old to admire the great
bard. I had been very enthusiastically praising Lord Byron's poetry. My
father calmly replied, 'Wordsworth is the great poet of modern times.'
Much surprised, I asked, 'And what may his special merits be?' The
answer was, 'They are very various, as for instance, depth, largeness,
elevation, and, what is rare in modern poetry, an _entire_ purity. In
his noble "Laodamia" they are chiefly majesty and pathos.' A few weeks
afterwards I chanced to take from the library shelves a volume of
Wordsworth, and it opened on 'Laodamia.' Some strong, calm hand seemed
to have been laid on my head, and bound me to the spot, till I had come
to the end. As I read, a new world, hitherto unimagined, opened itself
out, stretching far away into serene infinitudes. The region was one to
me unknown, but the harmony of the picture attested its reality. Above
and around were indeed

[273] _A Song of Faith, Devout Exercises, and Sonnets_ (Pickering). The
Dedication closed thus: 'I may at least hope to be named hereafter among
the friends of Wordsworth.'

    'An ampler ether, a diviner air,
    And fields invested with purpureal gleams;'

and when I reached the line,

    'Calm pleasures there abide--majestic pains,'

I felt that no tenants less stately could walk in so lordly a precinct.
I had been translated into another planet of song--one with larger
movements and a longer year. A wider conception of poetry had become
mine, and the Byronian enthusiasm fell from me like a bond that is
broken by being outgrown. The incident illustrates poetry in one of its
many characters, that of 'the deliverer.' The ready sympathies and
inexperienced imagination of youth make it surrender itself easily
despite its better aspirations, or in consequence of them, to a false
greatness; and the true greatness, once revealed, sets it free. As early
as 1824 Walter Savage Landor, in his 'Imaginary Conversation' between
Southey and Porson, had pronounced Wordsworth's 'Laodamia' to be 'a
composition such as Sophocles might have exulted to own, and a part of
which might have been heard with shouts of rapture in the regions he
describes'--the Elysian Fields.

Wordsworth frequently spoke of death, as if it were the taking of a new
degree in the University of Life. 'I should like,' he remarked to a
young lady, 'to visit Italy again before I move to another planet.' He
sometimes made a mistake in assuming that others were equally
philosophical. We were once breakfasting at the house of Mr. Rogers,
when Wordsworth, after gazing attentively round the room with a
benignant and complacent expression, turned to our host, and wishing to
compliment him, said, 'Mr. Rogers, I never see this house, so perfect in
its taste, so exquisite in all its arrangements, and decorated with
such well-chosen pictures, without fancying it the very house imaged to
himself by the Roman poet, when, in illustration of man's mortality, he
says, "Linquenda est domus."' 'What is that you are saying?' replied Mr.
Rogers, whose years, between eighty and ninety, had not improved his
hearing. 'I was remarking that your house,' replied Wordsworth, 'always
reminds me of the Ode (more properly called an Elegy, though doubtless
the lyrical measure not unnaturally causes it to be included among
Horace's Odes) in which the Roman poet writes "Linquenda est domus;"
that is, since, ladies being present, a translation may be deemed
desirable, _The house is_, or _has to be, left_; and again, "et placens
uxor"--and the pleasing wife; though, as we must all regret, that part
of the quotation is not applicable on the present occasion.' The Town
Bard, on whom 'no angle smiled' more than the end of St. James's-place,
did not enter into the views of the Bard of the Mountains. His answer
was what children call 'making a great face,' and the ejaculation,
'Don't talk Latin in, the society of ladies.' When I was going away he
remarked, 'What a stimulus the mountain air has on the appetite! I made
a sign to Edmund to hand him the cutlets a second time. I was afraid he
would stick his fork into that beautiful woman who sat next him.'
Wordsworth never resented a jest at his own expense. Once when we had
knocked three times in vain at the door of a London house, I exclaimed,
quoting his sonnet written on Westminster-bridge,

    'Dear God, the very houses seem asleep.'

He laughed heartily, then smiled gravely, and lastly recounted the
occasion, and described the early morning on which that sonnet was
written. He did not recite more than a part of it, to the accompaniment
of distant cab and carriage; and I thought that the door was opened too
soon.

Wordsworth, despite his dislike to great cities, was attracted
occasionally in his later years

    'To the proud margin of the Thames,
    And Lambeth's venerable towers,'

where his society was courted by persons of the most different
character. But he complained bitterly of the great city. It was next to
impossible, he remarked, to tell the truth in it. 'Yesterday I was at
S. House: the Duchess of S., showing me the pictures, observed, "This is
the portrait of my brother" (naming him), "and it is considered very
like." To this I assented, partly perhaps in absence of mind, but
partly, I think, with an impression that her Grace's brother was
probably a person whose face every one knew, or was expected to know; so
that, as I had never met him, my answer was in fact a lie! It is too bad
that, when more than seventy years old, I should be brought from the
mountains to London in order to tell a lie!' He made his complaint
wherever he went, laying the blame, however, not so much on himself, or
on the Duchess, as on the corrupt city; and some of those who learned
how the most truthful man in England had thus quickly been subverted by
metropolitan snares came to the conclusion that within a few years more
no virtue would be left extant in the land. He was likewise maltreated
in lesser ways. 'This morning I was compelled by my engagements to eat
three breakfasts--one with an aged and excellent gentleman, who may
justly be esteemed an accomplished man of letters, although I cannot
honestly concede to him the title of a poet; one at a fashionable party;
and one with an old friend whom no pressure would induce me to
neglect--although for this, my first breakfast to-day, I was obliged to
name the early hour of seven o'clock, as he lives in a remote part of
London.'

But it was only among his own mountains that Wordsworth could be
understood. He walked among them not so much to admire them as to
converse with them. They exchanged thoughts with him, in sunshine or
flying shadow, giving him their own and accepting his. Day and night, at
all hours, and in all weather, he would face them. If it rained, he
might fling his plaid over him, but would take no admonition. He must
have his way. On such occasions, dutiful as he was in higher matters, he
remained incurably wayward. In vain one reminded him that a letter
needed an answer, or that the storm would soon be over. It was very
necessary for him to do what he liked; and one of his dearest friends
said to me, with a smile of the most affectionate humour, 'He wrote his
"Ode to Duty," and then he had done with that matter.' This very
innocent form of lawlessness, corresponding with the classic expression,
'Indulge genio,' seemed to belong to his genius, not less than the
sympathetic reverence with which he looked up to the higher and
universal laws. Sometimes there was a battle between his reverence for
Nature and his reverence for other things. The friend already alluded to
was once remarking on his varying expressions of countenance. 'That
rough old face is capable of high and real beauty; I have seen in it an
expression quite of heavenly peace and contemplative delight, as the May
breeze came over him from the woods while he was slowly walking out of
church on a Sunday morning, and when he had half emerged from the
shadow.' A flippant person present inquired, 'Did you ever chance, Miss
F., to observe that heavenly expression on his countenance, as he was
walking into church, on a fine May morning?' A laugh was the reply. The
ways of Nature harmonised with his feelings in age as well as in youth.
He could understand no estrangement. Gathering a wreath of white thorn
on one occasion, he murmured, as he slipped it into the ribbon which
bound the golden tresses of his youthful companion,

    'And what if I enwreathed my own?
      'Twere no offence to reason;
    The sober hills thus deck their brows
      To meet the wintry season.'

       *       *       *       *       *




(_k_) FROM 'RECOLLECTIONS OF THE LAST DAYS OF SHELLEY AND BYRON.'

BY E.J. TRELAWNY. 1858 (MOXON).

Some days after this conversation I walked to Lausanne, to breakfast at
the hotel with an old friend, Captain Daniel Roberts, of the navy. He
was out sketching, but presently came in accompanied by two English
ladies, with whom he had made acquaintance whilst drawing, and whom he
brought to our hotel. The husband of one of them soon followed. I saw by
their utilitarian garb, as well as by the blisters and blotches on their
cheeks, lips, and noses, that they were pedestrian tourists, fresh from
the snow-covered mountains, the blazing sun and frosty air having acted
on their unseasoned skins as boiling water does on the lobster by dyeing
his dark coat scarlet. The man was evidently a denizen of the north, his
accent harsh, skin white, of an angular and bony build, and
self-confident and dogmatic in his opinions. The precision and
quaintness of his language, as well as his eccentric remarks on common
things, stimulated my mind. Our icy islanders thaw rapidly when they
have drifted into warmer latitudes: broken loose from its anti-social
system, mystic castes, coteries, sets, and sects, they lay aside their
purse-proud, tuft-hunting, and toadying ways, and are very apt to run
risk in the enjoyment of all their senses. Besides, we were compelled to
talk in strange company, if not from good breeding, to prove our breed,
as the gift of speech is often our principal, if not sole, distinction
from the rest of the brute animals.

To return to our breakfast. The travellers, flushed with health,
delighted with their excursion, and with appetites earned by bodily and
mental activity, were in such high spirits that Roberts and I caught the
infection of their mouth; we talked as loud and fast as if under the
exhilarating influence of champagne, instead of such a sedative compound
as _café au lait_. I can rescue nothing out of oblivion but a few last
words. The stranger expressed his disgust at the introduction of
carriages into the mountain districts of Switzerland, and at the old
fogies who used them.

'As to the arbitrary, pitiless, godless wretches,' he exclaimed, 'who
have removed Nature's landmarks by cutting roads through Alps and
Apennines, until all things are reduced to the same dead level, they
will he arraigned hereafter with the unjust: they have robbed the best
specimens of what men should be of their freeholds in the mountains; the
eagle, the black cock, and the red deer they have tamed or exterminated.
The lover of Nature can nowhere find a solitary nook to contemplate her
beauties. Yesterday,' he continued, 'at the break of day, I scaled the
most rugged height within my reach; it looked inaccessible; this
pleasant delusion was quickly dispelled; I was rudely startled out of a
deep reverie by the accursed jarring, jingling, and rumbling of a
calèche, and harsh voices that drowned the torrent's fall.'

The stranger, now hearing a commotion in the street, sprang on his feet,
looked out of the window, and rang the bell violently.

'Waiter,' he said, 'is that our carriage? Why did you not tells us?
Come, lasses, be stirring; the freshness of the day is gone. You may
rejoice in not having to walk; there is a chance of saving the remnants
of skin the sun has left on our chins and noses; to-day we shall he
stewed instead of barbecued.'

On their leaving the room to get ready for their journey, my friend
Roberts told me the strangers were the poet Wordsworth, his wife and
sister.

Who could have divined this? I could see no trace, in the hard features
and weather-stained brow of the outer man, of the divinity within him.
In a few minutes the travellers reappeared; we cordially shook hands,
and agreed to meet again at Geneva. Now that I knew that I was talking
to one of the veterans of the gentle craft, as there was no time to
waste in idle ceremony, I asked him abruptly what he thought of Shelley
as a poet.

'Nothing,' he replied as abruptly.

Seeing my surprise, he added, 'A poet who has not produced a good poem
before he is twenty-five we may conclude cannot and never will do so.'

'The "Cenci"!' I said eagerly.

'Won't do,' he replied, shaking his head, as he got into the carriage: a
rough-coated Scotch terrier followed him.

'This hairy fellow is our flea-trap,' he shouted out as they started
off.

When I recovered from the shock of having heard the harsh sentence
passed by an elder bard on a younger brother of the Muses, I exclaimed,

'After all, poets are but earth. It is the old story,--envy--Cain and
Abel. Professions, sects, and communities in general, right or wrong,
hold together, men of the pen excepted; if one of their guild is worsted
in the battle, they do as the rooks do by their inky brothers--fly from
him, cawing and screaming; if they don't fire the shot, they sound the
bugle to charge.'

I did not then know that the full-fledged author never reads the
writings of his contemporaries, except to cut them up in a review, that
being a work of love. In after years, Shelley being dead, Wordsworth
confessed this fact; he was then induced to read some of Shelley's
poems, and admitted that Shelley was the greatest master of harmonious
verse in our modern literature. (Pp. 4-8.)[274]

[274] See our Index, under Shelley, G.




(_l_) FROM 'LETTERS, EMBRACING HIS LIFE, OF JOHN JAMES TAYLER, B.A.,
PROFESSOR OF ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY AND BIBLICAL THEOLOGY, AND PRINCIPAL
OF MANCHESTER NEW COLLEGE. LONDON, 1872' (TWO VOLS. 8vo).

                   Spring Cottage, Loughrigg, Ambleside, July 26. 1826.

Rydal, where we now are, has an air of repose and seclusion which I have
rarely seen surpassed; the first few days we were here we perfectly
luxuriated in the purity and sweetness of the air and the delicious
stillness of its pastures and woods. It is interesting, too, on another
account, as being the residence of the poet Wordsworth: his house is
about a quarter of a mile from ours; and since Osler joined us we have
obtained an introduction to him, and he favoured us with his company at
tea one evening last week. He is a very interesting man, remarkably
simple in his manners, full of enthusiasm and eloquence in conversation,
especially on the subject of his favourite art--poetry--which he seems
to have studied in a very philosophical spirit, and about which he
entertains some peculiar opinions. Spenser, Shakspeare, and Milton are
his favourites among the English poets, especially the latter, whom he
almost idolises. He expressed one opinion which rather surprised me, and
in which I could not concur--that he preferred the 'Samson Agonistes' to
'Comus.' He recited in vindication of his judgment one very fine passage
from the former poem, and in a very striking manner; his voice is deep
and pathetic, and thrills with feeling. He is Toryish--at least what
would he considered so--in his political principles, though he disclaims
all connection with party, and certainly argues with great fairness and
temper on controverted topics, such as Parliamentary Reform and Catholic
Emancipation. We took a long walk with him the other evening, to the
scene of one of his Pastorals in the neighbourhood of Grasmere. He has a
good deal of general conversation, and has more the manners of a man of
the world than I should have expected from his poems; but his discourse
indicates great simplicity and purity of mind; indeed, nothing renders
his conversation more interesting than the unaffected tone of elevated
morality and devotion which pervades it. We have been reading his long
poem, the 'Excursion,' since we came here. I particularly recommend it
to your notice, barring some few extra vagancies into which his
peculiar theory has led him: his fourth book, the last, contains
specimens both of versification, sentiment, and imagery, scarcely
inferior to what you will find in the best passages of Milton. He spoke
with great plainness, and yet with candour, of his contemporaries. He
admitted the power of Byron in describing the workings of human passion,
but denied that he knew anything of the beauties of Nature, or succeeded
in describing them with fidelity. This he illustrated by examples. He
spoke with deserved severity of Byron's licentiousness and contempt of
religious decorum. He told us he thought the greatest of modern
geniuses, had he given his powers a proper direction, and one decidedly
superior to Byron, was Shelley, a young man, author of 'Queen Mab,' who
died lately at Rome. (Vol. i. pp. 72-4.)

                   Manchester, July 16. 1830.

....Though I am busy, I feel rather melancholy; and I am continually
reminded how sad my life would be without the society and affection of
those we love, and how terribly awful the dispensation of death must be
to those who cannot anticipate a future reunion, and regard it as the
utter extinction of all human interests and affections. I am solacing
myself with Wordsworth. Do you know, I shall become a thorough convert
to him. Much of his poetry is delicious, and I perfectly adore his
philosophy. To me he seems the purest, the most elevated, and the most
Christian of poets. I delight in his deep and tender piety, and his
spirit of exquisite sympathy with whatever is lovely and grand in the
breathing universe around us. (Vol. i. p. 86.)

       *       *       *       *       *


(_m_) ANECDOTE OF CRABBE.

FROM 'DIARY OF SIR WALTER SCOTT.'

Talking of Wordsworth, he [W.] told Anne a story, the object of which,
as she understood it, was to show that Crabbe had no imagination.
Crabbe, Sir George Beaumont, and Wordsworth were sitting together in
Murray's room in Albemarle-street. Sir George, after sealing a letter,
blew out the candle which had enabled him to do so, and exchanging a
look with Wordsworth, began to admire in silence the undulating thread
of smoke which slowly arose from the expiring wick, when Crabbe put on
the extinguisher. Anne laughed at the instance, and inquired if the
taper was wax; and being answered in the negative, seemed to think that
there was no call on Mr. Crabbe to sacrifice his sense of smell to their
admiration of beautiful and evanescent forms. In two other men I should
have said, 'Why, it is affectations,' with Sir Hugh Evans ['Merry Wives
of Windsor,' act i. scene 1]; but Sir George is the man in the world
most void of affectation; and then he is an exquisite painter, and no
doubt saw where the _incident_ would have succeeded in painting. The
error is not in you yourself receiving deep impressions from slight
hints, but in supposing that precisely the same sort of impression must
arise in the mind of men otherwise of kindred feeling, or that the
common-place folk of the world can derive such inductions at any time or
under any circumstances.[275]

       *       *       *       *       *




(_n_) LATER OPINION OF LOUD BROUGHAM.

I am just come from breakfasting with Henry Taylor to meet Wordsworth;
the same party as when he had Southey--Mill, Elliot, Charles Villiers.
Wordsworth may be bordering on sixty; hard-featured, brown, wrinkled,
with prominent teeth and a few scattered gray hairs, but nevertheless
not a disagreeable countenance; and very cheerful, merry, courteous, and
talkative, much more so than I should have expected from the grave and
didactic character of his writings. He held forth on poetry, painting,
politics, and metaphysics, and with a great deal of eloquence; he is
more conversible and with a greater flow of animal spirits than Southey.
He mentioned that he never wrote down as he composed, but composed
walking, riding, or in bed, and wrote down after; that Southey always
composes at his desk. He talked a great deal of Brougham, whose talents
and domestic virtues he greatly admires; that he was very generous and
affectionate in his disposition, full of duty and attention to his
mother, and had adopted and provided for a whole family of his brother's
children, and treats his wife's children as if they were his own. He
insisted upon taking them both with him to the Drawing-room the other
day when he went in state as Chancellor. They remonstrated with him, but
in vain.[276]

[275] 'Diary of Sir Walter Scott,' _Life_, by Lockhart, as before, vol.
ix. pp. 62-3.

[276] _The Greville Memoirs_. A Journal of the Reigns of King George IV.
and King William IV. By the late Charles C.F. Greville, Esq., Clerk of
the Council to those Sovereigns. Edited by Henry Reeve, Registrar of the
Privy Council. 3 vols. 8vo, fourth edition, 1875. Vol. ii. p. 120.




NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.


P. 5. Footnotes: 5a, 'Intake.' Cf. p. 436 (bottom).

P. 6, l. 6. 'Gives one bright glance,' &c. From 'The Seasons,' l. 175,
from the end of 'Summer.' Originally (1727) this line ran, 'Gives one
faint glimmer, and then disappears.'

P. 17, l. 2. Shelvocke's 'Voyages:' 'A Voyage round the World, by the
Way of the Great South Sea.' 1726, 8vo; 2d edition, 1757.

P. 22, l. 27. Milton, History of England, &c. 'The History of Britain,
that Part especially now called England; from the first traditional
Beginning, continued to the Norman Conquest. In six Books.' Lond. 1670.
(Works by Mitford, Prose, iii. pp. 1-301.)

P. 24, l. 28. Hearne's 'Journey,' &c.; viz. Samuel Hearne's 'Journey
from the Prince of Wales's Fort in Hudson's Bay to the Northern Ocean.'
1795, 4to.

P. 31, l. 12. Waterton's 'Wanderings,' &c.; viz. Charles Waterton's
'Wanderings in South America, the North-West of the United States, and
the Antilles.' 1825, 4to. Many subsequent editions, being a book that
has taken its place beside Walton's 'Angler' and White's 'Selborne.'

P. 32, l. 11. James Montgomery's 'Field Flower.' Nothing gratified this
'sweet Singer' so much as these words of Wordsworth. He used to point
them out to visitors if the conversation turned, or was directed, to
Wordsworth. The particular poem is a daintily-touched one, found in all
the editions of his Poems.

P. 32, l. 33. 'Has not Chaucer noticed it [the small Celandine]'?
Certainly not under this name, nor apparently under any other.

P. 33, l. 2. 'Frederica Brun.' More exactly Frederike. She was a minor
poetess; imitator of Matthison, whose own poems can hardly be called
original. (See Gostwick and Harrison's 'Outlines of German Literature,'
p. 355, cxxiii., 7th period, 1770-1830.)

P. 36, ll. 13-15. Quotation from Thomson, 'The Seasons,' 'Summer,' l.
980.

P. 44, l. 17. Quotation from Sir John Beaumont, 'The Battle of Bosworth
Field,' l. 100. (Poems in the Fuller Worthies' Library, p. 29.)
Accurately it is, 'The earth assists thee with the cry of blood.'

P. 47, ll. 17-19. 'The Triad.' Sara Coleridge thus wrote of this poem:
'Look at "The Triad," written by Mr. Wordsworth four-or five-and-twenty
years ago. That poem contains a poetical glorification of Edith Southey
(now W.), of Dora, and of myself. There is _truth_ in the sketch of
Dora, poetic truth, though such as none but a poet-father would have
seen. She was unique in her sweetness and goodness. I mean that her
character was most peculiar--a compound of vehemence of feeling and
gentleness, sharpness and lovingness, which is not often seen' ('Memoirs
and Letters of Sara Coleridge, edited by her Daughter,' 2 vols. 8vo, 3d
edition, 1873, p. 68). Later: 'I do confess that I have never been able
to rank "The Triad" among Mr. Wordsworth's immortal works of genius. It
is just what he came into the poetical world to condemn, and both by
practice and theory to supplant. It is to my mind _artificial_ and
_unreal_. There is no truth in it as a whole, although bits of truth,
glazed and magnified, are embodied in it, as in the lines, "Features to
old ideal grace allied"--a most unintelligible allusion to a likeness
discovered in dear Dora's contour of countenance to the great Memnon
head in the British Museum, with its overflowing lips and width of
mouth, which seems to be typical of the ocean. The poem always strikes
me as a mongrel,' &c. (p. 352).

P. 56, l. 7. 'Mr. Duppa.' See note in Vol. II. on p. 163, l. 2.

P. 56, l. 27. '179--.' _Sic_ in the MS. He died in January 1795.

P. 60, l. 16. 'Mr. Westall;' viz. William Westall's 'View of the Caves
near Ingleton, Gosdale Scar, and Malham Cove, in Yorkshire.' 1818,
folio.

P. 62, l. 31. 'The itinerant Eidouranian philosopher,' &c. Query--the
Walker of the book on the Lakes noticed in Vol. II. on p. 217?

P. 63, l. 6. 'I have reason,' &c. Cf. Letter to Sir W.R. Hamilton, first
herein printed, pp. 310-11.

P. 68, l. 24. Dampier's' Voyages, 'etc.; viz.' Collection of Voyages.'
London, 1729, 4 vols. 8vo.

P. 72, l. 29. 'Fulke Greville, Lord Brooke.' His complete Works in Verse
and Prose are given in the Fuller Worthies' Library, 4 vols.

P. 76, l. 14. Spenser. An apparent misrecollection of the 'Fairy Queen,'
b. iii. c. viii. st. 32, l. 7, 'Had her from so infamous fact assoyld.'

P. 78, l. 6. 'Armstrong;' _i.e._ Dr. John Armstrong, whose 'Art of
Preserving Health,' under an unpromising title, really contains splendid
things. His portrait in the 'Castle of Indolence' is his most certain
passport to immortality.

P. 80, l. 21. 'The Last Supper of Leonardo da Vinci.' A reproduction of
the head of our Blessed Lord, taken from the fresco (photograph), is
given in the quarto edition of Southwell's complete Poems in the Fuller
Worthies' Library--none the less precious that it pathetically reveals
the marks of Time's 'effacing fingers.' No engraving approaches the
'power' of this autotype of the supreme original.

P. 88, l. 32. 'Faber.' Among the treasures (unpublished) of the
Wordsworth Correspondence are various remarkable letters of Faber--one,
very singular, announcing his going over to the Church of Rome.

P. 90, l. 34. 'Mr. Robinson.' Cf. 'Reminiscences' onward.

P. 97, ll. 9-10, &c. 'Dyer.' Cf. note, Vol. II., on p. 296, l. 35.

P. 97, l. 18. 'Mr. Crowe;' _i.e._ Rev. William Crowe, Public Orator of
Oxford. His poem was originally published in 1786 (4to); reprinted 1804
(12mo).

P. 98, l. 19. 'Armstrong.' See on p. 78, l. 6.

P. 98, l. 20. 'Burns.' Verse-Epistle to William Simpson, st. 13; but for
'nae' read 'na,' and for 'na' read 'no.'

P. 101, l. 9. 'Rev. Joseph Sympson.' This poet, so pleasantly noticed by
Wordsworth, appears in none of the usual bibliographical authorities.
Curiously enough, his 'Vision of Alfred' was republished in the United
States--Philadelphia.

P. 116, ll. 33-34. Quotation, Shakspeare, 'Henry VIII.' iii. 2.

P. 120, l. 22. Quotation from Milton, 'Paradise Lost,' viii. l. 282.

P. 125, l. 4. 'Mr. Hazlitt quoted,' &c. See Index, _s.n._ for
Wordsworth's estimate of Hazlitt; also our Preface.

P. 130, l. 17. Hill at St. Alban's. See 'Eccl. Hist.' _s.n._

P. 130, l. 31. 'Germanus.' Bede, 'Eccl. Hist.' b. ii. c. xvi.

P. 131, l. 10. 'Fuller;' viz. his 'Church History.'

P. 131, l. 16. 'Turner.' The late laborious Sharon Turner, whose
'Histories' are still kept in print (apparently).

P. 131, l. 21. 'Paulinus.' Bede, 'Eccl. Hist.' b. ii. c. xvi.

P. 131, l. 26. 'King Edwin.' Bede, 'Eccl. Hist.' b. ii. c. xiii.

P. 136, l. 28. 'An old and much-valued friend in Oxfordshire;' viz. Rev.
Robert Jones, as before.

P. 137, l. 10. 'Dyer's History of Cambridge,' 2 vols. 8vo, 1814.

P. 137, l. 14. 'Burnet,' in his 'History of the Reformation;' many
editions.

P. 119, ll. 4-5. Latin verse-quotation, Ovid, 'Metam.' viii. 163, 164.

P. 151, l. 11. 'Charlotte Smith.' It seems a pity that the Poems of this
genuine Singer should have gone out of sight.

P. 155, l. 31. 'Russel.' Should be Russell. Some very beautiful Sonnets
of his appear in Dyce's well-known collection, and to it doubtless
Wordsworth was indebted for his knowledge of Russell. He has cruelly
passed out of memory.

P. 165, ll. 7-9. 'Is not the first stanza of Gray's,' etc. Gray himself
prefixed these lines from Aeschylus, 'Agam.' 181:

    [Greek: Zêna

           *       *       *       *       *
    ton phronein brotous hodô-
    santa, ton pathos
    thenta kuriôs echein.]

He seems to have been rather indebted to Dionysius' Ode to Nemesis, v.
Aratus.

P. 182, l. 9. 'Dr. Darwin's _Zoonomia_;' _i.e._ 'The Laws of Organic
Life,' 1794-96, 2 vols. 4to.

P. 182, l. 24. 'Peter Henry Bruce ... entertaining Memoirs.' Published
1782, 4to.

P. 185, ll. 2-3. Verse-quotation, from Milton, 'Il Penseroso,' ll.
109-110.

P. 190, l. 27. 'Light will be thrown,' &c. We have still to deplore that
the Letters of Lamb are even at this later day either withheld or
sorrowfully mutilated; _e.g._ among the Wordsworth Correspondence
(unpublished) is a whole sheaf of letters in their finest vein from Lamb
and his sister. Some of the former are written in black and red ink in
alternate lines, and overflow with all his deepest and quaintest
characteristics. His sister's are charming. The same might be said of
nearly all Wordsworth's greatest contemporaries. Surely these MSS. will
not much longer be kept in this inexplicable and, I venture to say,
scarcely pardonable seclusion?

P. 192, foot-note. This deliciously _naïve_ note of 'Dora' to her
venerated father suggests that it is due similarly to demur--with all
respect--to the representation given of Mrs. Hemans (pp. 193-4). Three
things it must be permitted me to recall: (_a_) That the 'brevity's
sake' hardly condones the fulness of statement of an imagined ignorance
of 'housewifery' on the part of Mrs. Hemans. (_b_) That a visitor for a
few days in a family could scarcely be expected to set about using her
needle in home duties. (_c_) That unquestionable testimony, furnished me
by those who knew her intimately, warrant me to state that Wordsworth
was mistaken in supposing that Mrs. Hemans 'could as easily have managed
the spear of Minerva as her needle.' Her brave and beautiful life, and
her single-handed upbringing of her many boys worthily, make one deeply
regret that such sweeping generalisation from a narrow and hasty
observation should have been indulged in. My profound veneration for
Wordsworth does not warrant my suppression of the truth in this matter.
Be it remembered, too, that other expressions of Wordsworth largely
qualify the present ungracious judgment.

P. 209, l. 8. 'Lord Ashley.' Now the illustrious and honoured Earl of
Shaftesbury.

P. 212, l. 17. 'Burnet;' _i.e._ Thomas Burnet, whose Latin treatise was
published in 1681 and 1689; in English, 1684 and 1689. Imaginative
genius will be found in this uncritical and unscientific book.

P. 214, l. 12. 'The Hurricane,' &c.; viz. 'The Hurricane; a Theosophical
and Western Eclogue,' &c. 1797; reprinted 1798.

P. 216, ll. 4-5. Quotation from Coleridge, from 'Sibylline Leaves,'
Inscription for a Fountain on a Heath.

P. 216, l. 29. 'Dr. Bell.' Southey edited the bulky Correspondence of
this pioneer of our better education, in 3 vols. 8vo.

P. 233, ll. 34-36. 'They have been treated,' &c. ('Evening Walk,' &c.,
1794.)

P. 247, foot-note [A]. De Quincey, in his 'Recollections of the Lakes
and the Lake Poets, Coleridge, Wordsworth, and Southey' (Works, vol. ii.
pp. 151-6), gives a very realistic _exposé_ of the Lonsdales--abating
considerably the glow of Wordsworth's recurring praise and homage.

P. 255, l. 31. 'History of Cleveland.' The book is by the Rev. John
Graves, and is entitled 'The History of Cleveland in the North Riding of
the County of York.' Carlisle, 1808. Wordsworth is unjust: it is a
deserving work, if o' times inevitably dry.

P. 285, l.1. 'Francis Edgeworth's "Dramatic Fragment."' This was Francis
Beaufort Edgeworth, half-brother of Maria Edgeworth.

P. 285, ll. 29-30. 'Spectator.' From No. 46, April 23, 1711, one of
Addison's own charming papers in his lighter vein of raillery.

P. 280, ll. 13-16. 'Mr. Page;' viz. Frederick Page, author of (_a_) 'The
Principle of the English Poor Laws illustrated and defended by an
Historical View of Indigence in Civil Society.' Bath, 1822. (_b_)
'Observations on the State of the Indigent Poor in Ireland, and the
existing Institutions for their Relief.' London, 1830.

P. 290, ll. 25-27. Verse-quotation, from Milton, 'Paradise Regained,' b.
iii. ll. 337-9.

P. 293, l. 1. Letter to Hamilton. The Rev. R.P. Graves,
M.A.--Wordsworth's friend--is engaged in preparing a Life of this
preeminent mathematician and many-gifted man of genius, than whom there
seems to have been no contemporary who so deeply impressed Wordsworth
intellectually, or so won his heart. The 'Poems' of Miss Hamilton (1
vol. 1838) sparkle with beauties, often unexpected as the flash of gems.
Space can only be found for one slight specimen of her gift in 'Lines
written in Miss Dora Wordsworth's Album,' as follows:

    'It is not now that I can speak, while still
        Thy lakes, thy hills, thyself are in my sight;
    I would be quiet--for the thoughts that fill
        My spirit's urn are a confused delight;
    They must have time to settle to the clear
        Untroubled calm of memory, ere they show,
    True as the water-depths around thee here,
        These images, that then will come and go,
    An everlasting joy. Far, far away
        As life, extends the shadow of to-day;
    And keenlier present from the past will come
        Thy sweet laugh's freshness pure, with all the poet's home.

'_Rydal Mount_. 1830.'

'The Boys' School' is the title of Miss Hamilton's poem referred to by
Wordsworth. It occurs in the volume, pp. 126-131. Her brother's was one
commencing, 'It haunts me yet.' The 'Mr. Nimmo' of this letter was a
civil engineer connected with the Ordnance Survey of Ireland.

P. 299, l. 18; 300, l. 8, &c. 'Countess of Winchelsea.' Sad to say, a
collection of this remarkable English gentlewoman's Poems remains still
an unfurnished _desideratum_.

P. 306, l. 11. 'The Duchess of Newcastle.' Edward Jenkins, Esq. M.P.,
has recently collected some of the Poems of this lady and her lord in a
pretty little volume, which he entitles, 'The Cavalier and the Lady.'

P. 312, l. 32. 'Eschylus and the eagle. 'The reference doubtless is to
Aeschylus' 'Prometheus Vinctus,' l. 1042:

    [Greek:
            Dids de toi
    ptênos kuôn, daphoinos aietos.]

Compare

    'Aischulos' bronze-throat _eagle-bark_ at blood
    Has somehow spoiled my taste for twitterings.'

Robert Browning, 'Aristophanes' Apology' (1875), p. 94.

P. 321, ll. 32-3. Verse-quotation, from 'Macbeth,' viz. i. 3.

P. 333, l. 2. 'Russell.' Before misspelled 'Russel' (p. 155).

P. 337, ll. 17-18. 'Auld Robin Grey' [= Gray], by Lady Ann Lindsay.
'Lament for the Defeat,' &c., viz. 'The Flowers of the Forest,' by (1)
Mrs. Cockburn; 'I've seen the smiling,' &c. (2), Miss Jane Elliot. 'I've
heard the lilting,' &c.

P. 342, l. 1. 'Shakspeare.' Quotation from Sonnet lxxiii.

P. 380, ll. 6-7. Horace, Ep. i. l, 8-9.

P. 382, ll. 27-9. Southey's Letters. Admirably done by his son Cuthbert
in many volumes. The seeming over-quantity have been reduced (to the
look) by the American reproduction in a single handsome volume.

P. 394. Heading of Letter 144. 'Of the' has by misadventure slipped in a
second time here. Read, 'Of the Heresiarch Church of Rome.'

P. 449, l. 34 onward. Mrs. Wordsworth. My excellent Correspondent the
Rev. R.P. Graves, of Dublin, thus writes me of Mrs. Wordsworth: 'I
forget whether it has been put on record, as it certainly deserves to
be, that Wordsworth habitually referred to his wife for the help of her
judgment on his poems. Mrs. Wordsworth did not indeed possess the
creative and colouring power of imagination that belonged to his sister
as well as to himself; but her simple truthfulness, her strong good
sense (which no sophistry could impose upon), and her delicate feeling
for propriety, rendered her judgment a test of utmost value with regard
to any subjects of which it could take adequate cognisance. And these
were confined within no narrow range--the workings of Nature as it lived
and moved around her, social equities and charities, religious and moral
truth, tried by the heart as well as by the head, and verbal expression,
required by her to avoid the regions of the merely abstract and
philosophical, and keep to the lower but more poetical ground of
idiomatic strength and transparent logic.'

P. 457, l. 18. 'The (almost) contemporary notice of Milton.' A still
more significant contemporary notice of Milton than the well-known one
of the text occurs in 'The Censure of the Rota upon Mr. Milton's book
entituled The Ready and Easie Way to establish a Free Commonwealth,
1660, by James Harrington,' as comes out at p. 16 ('_my_ Oceana'). As it
seems to have escaped the commentators, a short quotation must be given
here: 'Though you have scribled your eyes out, your works have never
been printed but for the company of Chandlers and Tobacco-Men, who are
your Stationers, and the onely men that vend your Labors' (pp. 4-5). 'He
[a member of the Rota] said that he himself reprieved the Whole _Defence
of the People of England_ for a groat, that was sentenced to vile
_Mundungus_, and had suffer'd inevitably (but for him), though it cost
you much oyle and the Rump 300_l._ a year,' &c. (ibid.). This of the
'Defence'!!!

P. 459, l. 7 onward. Horace, Ode iv. 2, 1; ibid. 2, 27.

P. 462, l. 15. 'Walter Scott is not a careful composer,' &c. This recurs
in Mr. Aubrey do Vere's 'Recollections' (p. 487 onward). I venture as a
Scot to observe that for this one slight misquotation by Scott, on which
so large a conclusion is built, the quotations by Wordsworth from others
would furnish twenty-fold. He was singularly inexact in quotation, as
even these Notes and Illustrations will satisfy in the places--scarcely
in a single instance being verbally accurate. 'Sweet' certainly was a
perfectly fitting word for the sequestered lake of St. Mary in its
serene summer beauty. Moreover, swans are not usually found singly, but
in pairs; and a pair surely differenced not greatly the symbol of
loneliness. The latter remark points to Wordsworth's further objection,
as stated to Mr. de Vere (as _supra_).

P. 492, l. 26. 'In the case of a certain poet since dead,' &c. I may
record what his own son has not felt free to do, that this was Sir
Aubrey de Vere, whose 'Song of Faith, and other Poems,' has not yet
gathered its ultimate renown. Wordsworth greatly admired the modest
little volume. See one of his Sonnets on page 495. Nor with the
Laureate's poem-play of 'Queen Mary' (Tudor) winning inevitable welcome
ought it to be forgotten--as even prominent critics of it are
sorrowfully forgetting--that Sir Aubrey de Vere, so long ago as 1847,
published _his_ drama of 'Mary Tudor.' I venture to affirm that it takes
its place--a lofty one--beside 'Philip van Artevelde,' and that it need
fear no comparison with 'Queen Mary.' Early and comparatively modern
supreme poetry somehow gets out of sight for long.

P. 497, 1. 15. Read 'no angel smiled.' I can only offer the plea of an
old Worthy, who said, 'Errata are inevitable, for we are human; and to
have none would imply eyes behind as well as before, or the wallet of
our errors all in front.' G.


