

COLERIDGE: VISIT TO COLEORTON: HOUBRAKEN: 'MADOC,' &c.

_To Sir George H. Beaumont, Bart_.

                           Grasmere, July 29th. [1805.]

MY DEAR SIR GEORGE,

We have all here been made happy in hearing that you are so much better.
I write now chiefly on account of a mistake which you seem to be under
concerning Coleridge. I guess from your letter that you suppose him to
be appointed to the place of Secretary to Sir A. Ball. This is by no
means the case. He is an occasional substitute for Mr. Chapman, who is
secretary, and no doubt must have resumed his office long before this;
as he had been expected every day some time before the date of C.'s last
letter. The paragraph in the Paper (which we also saw) positively states
that C. is appointed Secretary. This is an error, and has been merely
put in upon common rumour.

When you were ill I had a thought which I will mention to you. It was
this: I wished to know how you were at present situated as to house-room
at Coleorton, that is, whether you could have found a corner for me to
put my head in, in case I could have contrived to have commanded three
weeks' time, or so. I am at present, and shall be for some time, engaged
with a sick friend, who has come all the way from Bristol on purpose to
see us, and has taken lodgings in the Village; but should you be unwell
again, and my company be like to tend in the least to exhilarate you, I
should like to know, that were it in my power to go and see you, I might
have the liberty to do so.

Having such reason to expect Coleridge at present (were we at liberty in
other respects), I cannot think of taking my family on tour, agreeable
to your kind suggestion. Something has, however, already been added by
your means to our comforts, in the way of Books, and probably we shall
be able to make an excursion ere the Summer be over.

By the bye, are you possessed of Houbraken and Vertue's _Heads of
Illustrious Persons_, with anecdotes of their Lives by Birch? I had an
opportunity of purchasing a handsome copy (far below the price at which
it now sells, I believe, in London) at Penrith, a few weeks ago; and if
you have not a copy, and think the work has any merit, you would please
me greatly by giving it a place in your Library.

I am glad you like the passage in 'Madoc' about Llewellyn. Southey's
mind does not seem strong enough to draw the picture of a hero. The
character of Madoc is often very insipid and contemptible; for instance,
when he is told that the Foemen have surprised Caer, Madoc, and of
course (he has reason to believe) butchered or carried away all the
women and children, what does the Author make him do? Think of Goervyl
and Llayan very tenderly forsooth; but not a word about his people! In
short, according to my notion, the character is throughout languidly
conceived, and, as you observe, the contrast between her and Llewellyn
makes him look very mean. I made a mistake when I pointed out a
beautiful passage as being in the beginning of the meeting of the bards;
it occurs before, and ends thus:

                --His eyes were closed;
    His head, as if in reverence to receive
    The inspiration, bent; and as he raised
    His glowing countenance and brighter eye
    And swept with passionate hands the ringing harp.

The verses of your ancestor Francis Beaumont, the younger, are very
elegant and harmonious, and written with true feeling. Is this the only
poem of his extant? There are some pleasing Verses (I think by Corbet,
Bishop of Norwich) on the death of Francis Beaumont the elder. They end,
I remember, thus, alluding to his short life:

            --by whose sole death appears,
    Wit's a disease consumes men in few years.

I have never seen the works of the brother of the dramatic Poet; but I
know he wrote a poem upon the Battle of Bosworth Field. Probably it will
be in the volume which you have found, which it would give me great
pleasure to see, as also Charnwood Rocks, which must have a striking
effect in that country. I am highly flattered by Lady Beaumont's
favourable opinion of me and my poems.

My Sister will answer her affectionate letter very soon; she would have
done it before now, but she has been from home three days and unwell, or
entirely engrossed with some visitors whom we have had, the rest of her
time.

The letter which you will find accompanying this is from an
acquaintance of ours to his wife. He lives at Patterdale, and she was
over at Grasmere. We thought it would interest you. Farewell. I remain,
in hopes of good news of your health, your affectionate and sincere
friend,

                  W. WORDSWORTH.

_From Mr. Luff of Patterdale to his Wife_.

Patterdale, July 23d. [1805.]

An event happened here last night which has greatly affected the whole
village, and particularly myself.

The body, or more properly speaking, bones of a poor fellow were
yesterday found by Willy Harrison, in the rocks at the head of red Tarn.
It appears that he was attempting to descend the Pass from Helvellyn to
the Tarn, when he lost his footing and was dashed to pieces.

His name appears to have been Charles Gough. Several things were found
in his pockets; fishing tackle, memorandums, a gold watch, silver
pencil, Claude Lorraine glasses, &c.

Poor fellow! It is very strange, but we met him when we were last
reviewed in April; and he then wanted John Harrison to turn back with
him and go to the Tarn; but he was told that his request could not be
complied with. It appears that he proceeded [forward] and met his fate.

You will be much interested to know that a spaniel bitch was found alive
by his side, where she has remained upwards of three months, guarding
the bones of her master; but she had become so wild that it was with
difficulty she was taken. She is in good condition; and what is more
odd, had whelped a pup, which from its size must have lived some weeks,
but when found was lying dead by the bones. The bones are as completely
freed from flesh as if they had been anatomised, and perfectly white and
dry. The head can nowhere be found. The arms, one thigh and a leg were
all that remained in the clothes. All the rest were scattered about here
and there.

When I reflect on my own wanderings and the many dangerous situations I
have found myself in, in the pursuit of game, I cannot help thanking
Providence that I am now here to relate to you this melancholy tale. I
wonder whether poor Fan's affection would under similar circumstances
have equalled that of the little spaniel.


OF LORD NELSON AND 'THE HAPPY WARRIOR,' AND PITT; AND ON BUILDING,
GARDENING, &c.

_Letter to Sir George H. Beaumont, Bart_.

                           Grasmere, Feb. 11th. 1806.

MY DEAR SIR GEORGE,

Upon opening this letter, you must have seen that it is accompanied with
a copy of verses.[29] I hope they will give you some pleasure, as it
will be the best way in which they can repay me for a little vexation,
of which they have been the cause. They were written several weeks ago,
and I wished to send them to you, but could not muster up resolution, as
I felt that they were so unworthy of the subject. Accordingly, I kept
them by me from week to week, with a hope (which has proved vain) that,
in some happy moment, a new fit of inspiration would help me to mend
them; and hence my silence, which, with your usual goodness, I know you
will excuse.

[29] 'The Happy Warrior'

You will find that the verses are allusive to Lord Nelson; and they will
show that I must have sympathised with you in admiration of the man, and
sorrow for our loss. Yet, considering the matter coolly, there was
little to regret. The state of Lord Nelson's health, I suppose, was
such, that he could not have lived long; and the first burst of
exultation upon landing in his native country, and his reception here,
would have been dearly bought, perhaps, by pain and bodily weakness, and
distress among his friends, which he could neither remove nor alleviate.
Few men have ever died under circumstances so likely to make their
deaths of benefit to their country: it is not easy to see what his life
could have done comparable to it. The loss of such men as Lord Nelson
is, indeed, great and real; but surely not for the reason which makes
most people grieve, a supposition that no other such man is in the
country. The old ballad has taught us how to feel on these occasions:

    I trust I have within my realm
    Five hundred good as he.

But this is the evil, that nowhere is merit so much under the power of
what (to avoid a more serious expression) one may call that of fortune,
as in military and naval service; and it is five hundred to one that
such men will not have attained situations where they can show
themselves, so that the country may know in whom to trust. Lord Nelson
had attained that situation; and, therefore, I think (and not for the
other reason), ought we chiefly to lament that he is taken from us.

Mr. Pitt is also gone! by tens of thousands looked upon in like manner
as a great loss. For my own part, as probably you know, I have never
been able to regard his political life with complacency. I believe him,
however, to have been as disinterested a man, and as true a lover of his
country, as it was possible for so ambitious a man to be. His first wish
(though probably unknown to himself) was that his country should prosper
under his administration; his next that it should prosper. Could the
order of these wishes have been reversed, Mr. Pitt would have avoided
many of the grievous mistakes into which, I think, he fell. I know, my
dear Sir George, you will give me credit for speaking without arrogance;
and I am aware it is not unlikely you may differ greatly from me in
these points. But I like, in some things, to differ with a friend, and
that he should _know_ I differ from him; it seems to make a more healthy
friendship, to act as a relief to those notions and feelings which we
have in common, and to give them a grace and spirit which they could not
otherwise possess.

There were some parts in the long letter which I wrote about laying out
grounds, in which the expression must have been left imperfect. I like
splendid mansions in their proper places, and have no objection to large
or even obtrusive houses in themselves. My dislike is to that system of
gardening which, because a house happens to be large or splendid, and
stands at the head of a large domain, establishes it therefore as a
principle that the house ought to _dye_ all the surrounding country with
a strength of colouring and to an extent proportionate to its own
importance. This system, I think, is founded in false taste, false
feeling, and its effects disgusting in the highest degree. The reason
you mention as having induced you to build was worthy of you, and gave
me the highest pleasure. But I hope God will grant you and Lady Beaumont
life to enjoy yourselves the fruit of your exertions for many years.

We have lately had much anxiety about Coleridge. What can have become of
him? It must be upwards of three months since he landed at Trieste. Has
he returned to Malta think you, or what can have befallen him? He has
never since been heard of.

Lady Beaumont spoke of your having been ill of a cold; I hope you are
better. We have all here been more or less deranged in the same way.

We have to thank you for a present of game, which arrived in good time.

Never have a moment's uneasiness about answering my letters. We are all
well at present, and unite in affectionate wishes to you and Lady
Beaumont. Believe me,

                    Your sincere friend,
                           W. WORDSWORTH.


I have thoughts of sending the Verses to a Newspaper.[30]


[30] _Memoirs_, vol. i. p.321 _et seq_., with important additions from
the original. By a curious inadvertence this letter is dated 1796--quite
plainly--for 1806, as shown by the post-mark outside. G.

       *       *       *       *       *


OF HIS OWN POEMS AS FALSELY CRITICISED.

_Letter to Lady Beaumont_.

                           Coleorton, May 21. 1807.

MY DEAR LADY BEAUMONT,

Though I am to see you so soon, I cannot but write a word or two, to
thank you for the interest you take in my poems, as evinced by your
solicitude about their immediate reception. I write partly to thank you
for this, and to express the pleasure it has given me, and partly to
remove any uneasiness from your mind which the disappointments you
sometimes meet with, in this labour of love, may occasion. I see that
you have many battles to fight for me,--more than, in the ardour and
confidence of your pure and elevated mind, you had ever thought of being
summoned to; but be assured that this opposition is nothing more than
what I distinctly foresaw that you and my other friends would have to
encounter. I say this, not to give myself credit for an eye of prophecy,
but to allay any vexatious thoughts on my account which this opposition
may have produced in you.

It is impossible that any expectations can be lower than mine
concerning the immediate effect of this little work upon what is called
the public. I do not here take into consideration the envy and
malevolence, and all the bad passions which always stand in the way of a
work of any merit from a living poet; but merely think of the pure,
absolute, honest ignorance in which all worldlings of every rank and
situation must be enveloped, with respect to the thoughts, feelings, and
images, on which the life of my poems depends. The things which I have
taken, whether from within or without, what have they to do with routs,
dinners, morning calls, hurry from door to door, from street to street,
on foot or in carriage; with Mr. Pitt or Mr. Fox, Mr. Paul or Sir
Francis Burdett, the Westminster election or the borough of Honiton? In
a word--for I cannot stop to make my way through the hurry of images
that present themselves to me--what have they to do with endless talking
about things nobody cares any thing for except as far as their own
vanity is concerned, and this with persons they care nothing for but as
their vanity or _selfishness_ is concerned?--what have they to do (to
say all at once) with a life without love? In such a life there can be
no thought; for we have no thought (save thoughts of pain) but as far as
we have love and admiration.

It is an awful truth, that there neither is, nor can be, any genuine
enjoyment of poetry among nineteen out of twenty of those persons who
live, or wish to live, in the broad light of the world--among those who
either are, or are striving to make themselves, people of consideration
in society. This is a truth, and an awful one, because to be incapable
of a feeling of poetry, in my sense of the word, is to be without love
of human nature and reverence for God.

Upon this I shall insist elsewhere; at present let me confine myself to
my object, which is to make you, my dear friend, as easy-hearted as
myself with respect to these poems. Trouble not yourself upon their
present reception; of what moment is that compared with what I trust is
their destiny?--to console the afflicted; to add sunshine to daylight,
by making the happy happier; to teach the young and the gracious of
every age to see, to think, and feel, and, therefore, to become more
actively and securely virtuous; this is their office, which I trust they
will faithfully perform, long after we (that is, all that is mortal of
us) are mouldered in our graves. I am well aware how far it would seem
to many I over-rate my own exertions, when I speak in this way, in
direct connection with the volume I have just made public.

I am not, however, afraid of such censure, insignificant as probably the
majority of those poems would appear to very respectable persons. I do
not mean London wits and witlings, for these have too many foul passions
about them to be respectable, even if they had more intellect than the
benign laws of Providence will allow to such a heartless existence as
theirs is; but grave, kindly-natured, worthy persons, who would be
pleased if they could. I hope that these volumes are not without some
recommendations, even for readers of this class: but their imagination
has slept; and the voice which is the voice of my poetry, without
imagination, cannot be heard. Leaving these, I was going to say a word
to such readers as Mr. ----. Such!--how would he be offended if he knew I
considered him only as a representative of a class, and not an unique!
'Pity,' says Mr. ---- 'that so many trifling things should be admitted to
obstruct the view of those that have merit.' Now, let this candid judge
take, by way of example, the sonnets, which, probably, with the
exception of two or three other poems, for which I will not contend,
appear to him the most trifling, as they are the shortest. I would say
to him, omitting things of higher consideration, there is one thing
which must strike you at once, if you will only read these poems,--that
those 'to Liberty,' at least, have a connection with, or a bearing upon,
each other; and, therefore, if individually they want weight, perhaps,
as a body, they may not be so deficient. At least, this ought to induce
you to suspend your judgment, and qualify it so far as to allow that the
writer aims at least at comprehensiveness.

But, dropping this, I would boldly say at once, that these sonnets,
while they each fix the attention upon some important sentiment,
separately considered, do, at the same time, collectively make a poem on
the subject of civil liberty and national independence, which, either
for simplicity of style or grandeur of moral sentiment, is, alas! likely
to have few parallels in the poetry of the present day. Again, turn to
the 'Moods of my own Mind.' There is scarcely a poem here of above
thirty lines, and very trifling these poems will appear to many; but,
omitting to speak of them individually, do they not, taken
collectively, fix the attention upon a subject eminently poetical,
viz., the interest which objects in Nature derive from the predominance
of certain affections, more or less permanent, more or less capable of
salutary renewal in the mind of the being contemplating these objects?
This is poetic, and essentially poetic. And why? Because it is creative.

But I am wasting words, for it is nothing more than you know; and if
said to those for whom it is intended, it would not be understood.

I see by your last letter, that Mrs. Fermor has entered into the spirit
of these 'Moods of my own Mind.' Your transcript from her letter gave me
the greatest pleasure; but I must say that even she has something yet to
receive from me. I say this with confidence, from her thinking that I
have fallen below myself in the sonnet, beginning,

    With ships the sea was sprinkled far and nigh.

As to the other which she objects to, I will only observe, that there is
a misprint in the last line but two,

    And _though_ this wilderness,

for

    And _through_ this wilderness,

that makes it unintelligible. This latter sonnet, for many reasons
(though I do not abandon it), I will not now speak of; but upon the
other, I could say something important in conversation, and will attempt
now to illustrate it by a comment, which, I feel, will be inadequate to
convey my meaning. There is scarcely one of my poems which does not aim
to direct the attention to some moral sentiment, or to some general
principle, or law of thought, or of our intellectual constitution. For
instance, in the present case, who is there that has not felt that the
mind can have no rest among a multitude of objects, of which it either
cannot make one whole, or from which it cannot single out one individual
whereupon may be concentrated the attention, divided among or distracted
by a multitude? After a certain time, we must either select one image or
object, which must put out of view the rest wholly, or must subordinate
them to itself while it stands forth as a head:

        How glowed the firmament
    With living sapphires! Hesperus, that _led_
    The starry host, rode brightest; till the moon,
    Rising in clouded majesty, at length,
    Apparent _Queen_, unveiled _her peerless_ light,
    And o'er the dark her silver mantle threw.

Having laid this down as a general principle, take the case before us. I
am represented in the sonnet as casting my eyes over the sea, sprinkled
with a multitude of ships, like the heavens with stars. My mind may be
supposed to float up and down among them, in a kind of dreamy
indifference with respect either to this or that one, only in a
pleasurable state of feeling with respect to the whole prospect.
'Joyously it showed.' This continued till that feeling may be supposed
to have passed away, and a kind of comparative listlessness or apathy to
have succeeded, as at this line,

    Some veering up and down, one knew not why.

All at once, while I am in this state, comes forth an object, an
individual; and my mind, sleepy and unfixed, is awakened and fastened in
a moment.

               Hesperus, that _led_
    The starry host,

is a poetical object, because the glory of his own nature gives him the
pre-eminence the moment he appears. He calls forth the poetic faculty,
receiving its exertions as a tribute. But this ship in the sonnet may,
in a manner still more appropriate, be said to come upon a mission of
the poetic spirit, because, in its own appearance and attributes, it is
barely sufficiently distinguished to rouse the creative faculty of the
human mind, to exertions at all times welcome, but doubly so when they
come upon us when in a state of remissness. The mind being once fixed
and roused, all the rest comes from itself; it is merely a lordly ship,
nothing more:

    This ship was nought to me, nor I to her,
    Yet I pursued her with a lover's look.

My mind wantons with grateful joy in the exercise of its own powers,
and, loving its own creation,

    This ship to all the rest I did prefer,

making her a sovereign or a regent, and thus giving body and life to all
the rest; mingling up this idea with fondness and praise--

    where she comes the winds must stir;

and concluding the whole with,

    On went she, and due north her journey took;

thus taking up again the reader with whom I began, letting him know how
long I must have watched this favourite vessel, and inviting him to rest
his mind as mine is resting.

Having said so much upon mere fourteen lines, which Mrs. Fermor did not
approve, I cannot but add a word or two upon my satisfaction in finding
that my mind has so much in common with hers, and that we participate so
many of each other's pleasures. I collect this from her having singled
out the two little poems, 'The Daffodils,' and 'The Rock crowned with
Snowdrops.' I am sure that whoever is much pleased with either of these
quiet and tender delineations must be fitted to walk through the
recesses of my poetry with delight, and will there recognise, at every
turn, something or other in which, and over which, it has that property
and right which knowledge and love confer. The line,

    Come, blessed barrier, &c.

in the 'Sonnet upon Sleep,' which Mrs. F. points out, had before been
mentioned to me by Coleridge, and, indeed, by almost every body who had
heard it, as eminently beautiful. My letter (as this second sheet, which
I am obliged to take, admonishes me) is growing to an enormous length;
and yet, saving that I have expressed my calm confidence that these
poems will live, I have said nothing which has a particular application
to the object of it, which was to remove all disquiet from your mind on
account of the condemnation they may at present incur from that portion
of my contemporaries who are called the public. I am sure, my dear Lady
Beaumont, if you attach any importance to it, it can only be from an
apprehension that it may affect me, upon which I have already set you at
ease; or from a fear that this present blame is ominous of their future
or final destiny. If this be the case, your tenderness for me betrays
you. Be assured that the decision of these persons has nothing to do
with the question; they are altogether incompetent judges. These people,
in the senseless hurry of their idle lives, do not _read_ books, they
merely snatch a glance at them, that they may talk about them. And even
if this were not so, never forget what, I believe, was observed to you
by Coleridge, that every great and original writer, in proportion as he
is great or original, must himself create the taste by which he is to be
relished; he must teach the art by which he is to be seen; this, in a
certain degree, even to all persons, however wise and pure may be their
lives, and however unvitiated their taste. But for those who dip into
books in order to give an opinion of them, or talk about them to take up
an opinion--for this multitude of unhappy, and misguided, and misguiding
beings, an entire regeneration must be produced; and if this be
possible, it must be a work _of time_. To conclude, my ears are
stone-dead to this idle buzz, and my flesh as insensible as iron to
these petty stings; and, after what I have said, I am sure yours will be
the same. I doubt not that you will share with me an invincible
confidence that my writings (and among them these little poems) will
co-operate with the benign tendencies in human nature and society,
wherever found; and that they will, in their degree, be efficacious in
making men wiser, better, and happier. Farewell! I will not apologise
for this letter, though its length demands an apology. Believe me,
eagerly wishing for the happy day when I shall see you and Sir George
here,

     Most affectionately yours,
                 W. WORDSWORTH.

Do not hurry your coming hither on our account: my sister regrets that
she did not press this upon you, as you say in your letter, 'we cannot
_possibly_ come before the first week in June;' from which we infer that
your kindness will induce you to make sacrifices for our sakes. Whatever
pleasure we may have in thinking of Grasmere, we have no impatience to
be gone, and think with full as much regret of leaving Coleorton. I had,
for myself, indeed, a wish to be at Grasmere with as much of the summer
before me as might be; but to this I attach no importance whatever, as
far as the gratification of that wish interferes with any inclination or
duty of yours. I could not be satisfied without seeing you here, and
shall have great pleasure in waiting.[31]

[31] _Memoirs_, vol. i. pp. 331-40.


OF 'PETER BELL' AND OTHER POEMS. _Letter to Sir George H. Beaumont,
Bart_.

     MY DEAR SIR GEORGE,

I am quite delighted to hear of your picture for 'Peter Bell;' I was
much pleased with the sketch, and I have no doubt that the picture will
surpass it as far as a picture ought to do. I long much to see it. I
should approve of any engraver approved by you. But remember that no
poem of mine will ever be popular; and I am afraid that the sale of
'Peter' would not carry the expence of the engraving, and that the poem,
in the estimation of the public, would be a weight upon the print. I say
not this in modest disparagement of the poem, but in sorrow for the
sickly taste of the public in verse. The _people_ would love the poem of
'Peter Bell,' but the _public_ (a very different being) will never love
it. Thanks for dear Lady B.'s transcript from your friend's letter; it
is written with candour, but I must say a word or two not in praise of
it. 'Instances of what I mean,' says your friend, 'are to be found in a
poem on a Daisy' (by the by, it is on _the_ Daisy, a mighty difference!)
'and on _Daffodils reflected in the Water_.' Is this accurately
transcribed by Lady Beaumont? If it be, what shall we think of criticism
or judgment founded upon, and exemplified by, a poem which must have
been so inattentively perused? My language is precise; and, therefore,
it would be false modesty to charge myself with blame.

              Beneath the trees,
    Ten thousand dancing in the _breeze_.
    The _waves beside_ them danced, but they
    Outdid the _sparkling waves_ in glee.

Can expression be more distinct? And let me ask your friend how it is
possible for flowers to be _reflected_ in water where there are _waves_?
They may, indeed, in _still_ water; but the very object of my poem is
the trouble or agitation, both of the flowers and the water. I must
needs respect the understanding of every one honoured by your
friendship; but sincerity compels me to say that my poems must be more
nearly looked at, before they can give rise to any remarks of much
value, even from the strongest minds. With respect to this individual
poem, Lady B. will recollect how Mrs. Fermor expressed herself upon it.
A letter also was sent to me, addressed to a friend of mine, and by him
communicated to me, in which this identical poem was singled out for
fervent approbation. What then shall we say? Why, let the poet first
consult his own heart, as I have done, and leave the rest to
posterity,--to, I hope, an improving posterity. The fact is, the English
_public_ are at this moment in the same state of mind with respect to my
poems, if small things may be compared with great, as the French are in
respect to Shakspeare, and not the French alone, but almost the whole
Continent. In short, in your friend's letter, I am condemned for the
very thing for which I ought to have been praised, viz., that I have not
written down to the level of superficial observers and unthinking minds.
Every great poet is a teacher: I wish either to be considered as a
teacher, or as nothing.

To turn to a more pleasing subject. Have you painted anything else
beside this picture from 'Peter Bell'? Your two oil-paintings (and,
indeed, everything I have of yours) have been much admired by the
artists who have seen them. And, for our own parts, we like them better
every day; this, in particular, is the case with the small picture from
the neighbourhood of Coleorton, which, indeed, pleased me much at the
first sight, but less impressed the rest of our household, who now see
as many beauties in it as I do myself. Havill, the water-colour painter,
was much pleased with these things; he is painting at Ambleside, and has
done a view of Rydal Water, looking down upon it from Rydal Park, of
which I should like to know your opinion; it will be exhibited in the
Spring, in the water-colour Exhibition. I have purchased a black-lead
pencil sketch of Mr. Green, of Ambleside, which, I think, has great
merit, the materials being uncommonly picturesque, and well put
together: I should dearly like to have the same subject (it is the
cottage at Glencoign, by Ulleswater) treated by you. In the poem I have
just written, you will find one situation which, if the work should ever
become familiarly known, would furnish as fine a subject for a picture
as any thing I remember in poetry ancient or modern. I need not mention
what it is, as when you read the poem you cannot miss it. We have at
last had, by the same post, two letters from Coleridge, long and
melancholy; and also, from Keswick, an account so depressing as to the
state of his health, that I should have set off immediately to London,
to see him, if I had not myself been confined by indisposition.

I hope that Davy is by this time perfectly restored to health. Believe
me, my dear Sir George,

               Most sincerely yours,
                      W. WORDSWORTH.[32]

[32] _Memoirs_, vol. i. pp. 340-3.


OF BUILDING AND GARDENING AND LAYING OUT OF GROUNDS. _Letter to Sir
George H. Beaumont, Bart_.

                           Grasmere, October 17th. 1805.

MY DEAR SIR GEORGE,

I was very glad to learn that you had room for me at Coleorton, and far
more so, that your health was so much mended. Lady Beaumont's last
letter to my sister has made us wish that you were fairly through your
present engagements with workmen and builders, and, as to improvements,
had smoothed over the first difficulties, and gotten things into a way
of improving themselves. I do not suppose that any man ever built a
house, without finding in the progress of it obstacles that were
unforeseen, and something that might have been better planned; things
teazing and vexatious when they come, however the mind may have been
made up at the outset to a general expectation of the kind.

With respect to the grounds, you have there the advantage of being in
good hands, namely, those of Nature; and, assuredly, whatever petty
crosses from contrariety of opinion or any other cause you may now meet
with, these will soon disappear, and leave nothing behind but
satisfaction and harmony. Setting out from the distinction made by
Coleridge which you mentioned, that your house will belong to the
country, and not the country be an appendage to your house, you cannot
be wrong. Indeed, in the present state of society, I see nothing
interesting either to the imagination or the heart, and, of course,
nothing which true taste can approve, in any interference with Nature,
grounded upon any other principle. In times when the feudal system was
in its vigor, and the personal importance of every chieftain might be
said to depend entirely upon the extent of his landed property and
rights of seignory; when the king, in the habits of people's minds, was
considered as the primary and true proprietor of the soil, which was
granted out by him to different lords, and again by them to their
several tenants under them, for the joint defence of all; there might
have been something imposing to the imagination in the whole face of a
district, testifying, obtrusively even, its dependence upon its chief.
Such an image would have been in the spirit of the society, implying
power, grandeur, military state, and security; and, less directly, in
the person of the chief, high birth, and knightly education and
accomplishments; in short, the most of what was then deemed interesting
or affecting. Yet, with the exception of large parks and forests,
nothing of this kind was known at that time, and these were left in
their wild state, so that such display of ownership, so far from taking
from the beauty of Nature, was itself a chief cause of that beauty being
left unspoiled and unimpaired. The _improvements_, when the place was
sufficiently tranquil to admit of any, though absurd and monstrous in
themselves, were confined (as our present Laureate has observed, I
remember, in one of his essays) to an acre or two about the house in the
shape of garden with terraces, &c. So that Nature had greatly the
advantage in those days, when what has been called English gardening was
unheard of. This is now beginning to be perceived, and we are setting
out to travel backwards. Painters and poets have had the credit of being
reckoned the fathers of English gardening; they will also have,
hereafter, the better praise of being fathers of a better taste. Error
is in general nothing more than getting hold of good things, as every
thing has two handles, by the wrong one. It was a misconception of the
meaning and principles of poets and painters which gave countenance to
the modern system of gardening, which is now, I hope, on the decline; in
other words, we are submitting to the rule which you at present are
guided by, that of having our houses belong to the country, which will
of course lead us back to the simplicity of Nature. And leaving your own
individual sentiments and present work out of the question, what good
can come of any other guide, under any circumstances? We have, indeed,
distinctions of rank, hereditary legislators, and large landed
proprietors; but from numberless causes the state of society is so much
altered, that nothing of that lofty or imposing interest, formerly
attached to large property in land, can now exist; none of the poetic
pride, and pomp, and circumstance; nor anything that can be considered
as making amends for violation done to the holiness of Nature. Let us
take an extreme case, such as a residence of a Duke of Norfolk, or
Northumberland: of course you would expect a mansion, in some degree
answerable to their consequence, with all conveniences. The names of
Howard and Percy will always stand high in the regards of Englishmen;
but it is degrading, not only to such families as these, but to every
really interesting one, to suppose that their importance will be most
felt where most displayed, particularly in the way I am now alluding to.
This is contracting a general feeling into a local one. Besides, were it
not so, as to what concerns the Past, a man would be sadly astray, who
should go, for example, to modernise Alnwick and its dependencies, with
his head full of the ancient Percies: he would find nothing there which
would remind him of them, except by contrast; and of that kind of
admonition he would, indeed, have enough. But this by the bye, for it is
against the principle itself I am contending, and not the misapplication
of it. After what was said above, I may ask, if anything connected with
the families of Howard and Percy, and their rank and influence, and thus
with the state of government and society, could, in the present age, be
deemed a recompence for their thrusting themselves in between us and
Nature. Surely it is a substitution of little things for great when we
would put a whole country into a nobleman's livery. I know nothing which
to me would be so pleasing or affecting, as to be able to say when I am
in the midst of a large estate--This man is not the victim of his
condition; he is not the spoiled child of worldly grandeur; the thought
of himself does not take the lead in his enjoyments; he is, where he
ought to be, lowly-minded, and has human feelings; he has a true relish
of simplicity, and therefore stands the best chance of being happy; at
least, without it there is no happiness, because there can be no true
sense of the bounty and beauty of the creation, or insight into the
constitution of the human mind. Let a man of wealth and influence shew,
by the appearance of the country in his neighbourhood, that he treads
in the steps of the good sense of the age, and occasionally goes
foremost; let him give countenance to improvements in agriculture,
steering clear of the pedantry of it, and showing that its grossest
utilities will connect themselves harmoniously with the more
intellectual arts, and even thrive the best under such connection; let
him do his utmost to be surrounded with tenants living comfortably,
which will bring always with it the best of all graces which a country
can have--flourishing fields and happy-looking houses; and, in that part
of his estate devoted to park and pleasure-ground, let him keep himself
as much out of sight as possible; let Nature be all in all, taking care
that everything done by man shall be in the way of being adopted by her.
If people chuse that a great mansion should be the chief figure in a
country, let this kind of keeping prevail through the picture, and true
taste will find no fault.

I am writing now rather for writing's sake than anything else, for I
have many remembrances beating about in my head which you would little
suspect. I have been thinking of you, and Coleridge, and our Scotch
Tour, and Lord Lowther's grounds, and Heaven knows what. I have had
before me the tremendously long ell-wide gravel walks of the Duke of
Athol, among the wild glens of Blair, Bruar Water, and Dunkeld, brushed
neatly, without a blade of grass or weed upon them, or anything that
bore traces of a human footstep; much indeed of human hands, but wear or
tear of foot was none. Thence I pass'd to our neighbour, Lord Lowther.
You know that his predecessor, greatly, without doubt, to the advantage
of the place, left it to take care of itself. The present lord seems
disposed to do something, but not much. He has a neighbour, a Quaker, an
amiable, inoffensive man[33], and a little of a poet too, who has amused
himself, upon his own small estate upon the Emont, in twining pathways
along the banks of the river, making little cells and bowers with
inscriptions of his own writing, all very pretty as not spreading far.
This man is at present Arbiter Elegantiarum, or master of the grounds,
at Lowther, and what he has done hitherto is very well, as it is little
more than making accessible what could not before be got at.

[33] Mr. Thomas Wilkinson. See poem, 'To his Spade.'

You know something of Lowther. I believe a more delightful spot is not under
the sun. Last summer I had a charming walk along the river, for which I was
indebted to this man, whose intention is to carry the walk along the
river-side till it joins the great road at Lowther Bridge, which you
will recollect, just under Brougham, about a mile from Penrith. This to
my great sorrow! for the manufactured walk, which was absolutely
necessary in many places, will in one place pass through a few hundred
yards of forest ground, and will there efface the most beautiful
specimen of a forest pathway ever seen by human eyes, and which I have
paced many an hour, when I was a youth, with some of those I best love.
This path winds on under the trees with the wantonness of a river or a
living creature; and even if I may say so with the subtlety of a spirit,
contracting or enlarging itself, visible or invisible as it likes. There
is a continued opening between the trees, a narrow slip of green turf
besprinkled with flowers, chiefly daisies, and here it is, if I may use
the same kind of language, that this pretty path plays its pranks,
wearing away the turf and flowers at its pleasure. When I took the walk
I was speaking of, last summer, it was Sunday. I met several of the
people of the country posting to and from church, in different parts;
and in a retired spot by the river-side were two musicians (belonging
probably to some corps of volunteers) playing upon the hautboy and
clarionet. You may guess I was not a little delighted; and as you had
been a visiter at Lowther, I could not help wishing you were with me.
And now I am brought to the sentiment which occasioned this detail; I
may say, brought back to my subject, which is this,--that all just and
solid pleasure in natural objects rests upon two pillars, God and Man.
Laying out grounds, as it is called, may be considered as a liberal art,
in some sort like poetry and painting; and its object, like that of all
the liberal arts, is, or ought to be, to move the affections under the
controul of good sense; that is, those of the best and wisest: but,
speaking with more precision, it is to assist Nature in moving the
affections, and, surely, as I have said, the affections of those who
have the deepest perception of the beauty of Nature; who have the most
valuable feelings, that is, the most permanent, the most independent,
the most ennobling, connected with Nature and human life. No liberal art
aims merely at the gratification of an individual or a class: the
painter or poet is degraded in proportion as he does so; the true
servants of the Arts pay homage to the human kind as impersonated in
unwarped and enlightened minds. If this be so when we are merely putting
together words or colours, how much more ought the feeling to prevail
when we are in the midst of the realities of things; of the beauty and
harmony, of the joy and happiness of living creatures; of men and
children, of birds and beasts, of hills and streams, and trees and
flowers; with the changes of night and day, evening and morning, summer
and winter; and all their unwearied actions and energies, as benign in
the spirit that animates them as they are beautiful and grand in that
form and clothing which is given to them for the delight of our senses!
But I must stop, for you feel these things as deeply as I; more deeply,
if it were only for this, that you have lived longer. What then shall we
say of many great mansions with their unqualified expulsion of human
creatures from their neighbourhood, happy or not; houses, which do what
is fabled of the upas tree, that they breathe out death and desolation!
I know you will feel with me here, both as a man and a lover and
professor of the arts. I was glad to hear from Lady Beaumont that you
did not think of removing your village. Of course much here will depend
upon circumstances, above all, with what kind of inhabitants, from the
nature of the employments in that district, the village is likely to be
stocked. But, for my part, strip my neighbourhood of human beings, and I
should think it one of the greatest privations I could undergo. You have
all the poverty of solitude, nothing of its elevation. In a word, if I
were disposed to write a sermon (and this is something like one) upon
the subject of taste in natural beauty, I should take for my text the
little pathway in Lowther Woods, and all which I had to say would begin
and end in the human heart, as under the direction of the Divine Nature,
conferring value on the objects of the senses, and pointing out what is
valuable in them.

I began this subject with Coleorton in my thoughts, and a confidence,
that whatever difficulties or crosses (as of many good things it is not
easy to chuse the best) you might meet with in the practical application
of your principles of Taste, yet, being what they are, you will soon be
pleased and satisfied. Only (if I may take the freedom to say so) do not
give way too much to others: considering what your studies and pursuits
have been, your own judgment must be the best: professional men may
suggest hints, but I would keep the decision to myself.

Lady Beaumont utters something like an apprehension that the slowness of
workmen or other impediments may prevent our families meeting at
Coleorton next summer. We shall be sorry for this, the more so, as the
same cause will hinder your coming hither. At all events, we shall
depend upon her frankness, which we take most kindly indeed; I mean, on
the promise she has made, to let us know whether you are gotten so far
through your work as to make it comfortable for us all to be together.

I cannot close this letter without a word about myself. I am sorry to
say I am not yet settled to any serious employment. The expectation of
Coleridge not a little unhinges me, and, still more, the number of
visitors we have had; but winter is approaching, and I have good hopes.
I mentioned Michael Angelo's poetry some time ago; it is the most
difficult to construe I ever met with, but just what you would expect
from such a man, shewing abundantly how conversant his soul was with
great things. There is a mistake in the world concerning the Italian
language; the poetry of Dante and Michael Angelo proves, that if there
be little majesty and strength in Italian verse, the fault is in the
authors, and not in the tongue. I can translate, and have translated,
two books of Ariosto, at the rate, nearly, of 100 lines a day; but so
much meaning has been put by Michael Angelo into so little room, and
that meaning sometimes so excellent in itself, that I found the
difficulty of translating him insurmountable. I attempted, at least,
fifteen of the sonnets, but could not anywhere succeed. I have sent you
the only one I was able to finish: it is far from being the best, or
most characteristic, but the others were too much for me.[34]

[34] 'Yes, Hope may with my strong desire keep pace,' &c.

I began this letter about a week ago, having been interrupted. I mention
this, because I have on this account to apologise to Lady Beaumont, and
to my sister also, whose intention it was to have written, but being
very much engaged, she put it off as I was writing. We have been weaning
Dorothy, and since, she has had a return of the croup from an imprudent
exposure on a very cold day. But she is doing well again; and my sister
will write very soon. Lady Beaumont inquired how game might be sent us.
There is a direct conveyance from Manchester to Kendal by the mail, and
a parcel directed for me, to be delivered at Kendal, immediately, to
John Brockbank, Ambleside, postman, would, I dare say, find its way to
us expeditiously enough; only you will have the goodness to mention in
your letters when you do send anything, otherwise we may not be aware of
any mistake.

I am glad the Houbraken will be acceptable, and will send it any way you
shall think proper, though perhaps, as it would only make a small
parcel, there might be some risk in trusting it to the waggon or mail,
unless it could be conveniently inquired after. No news of Coleridge.
The length of this letter is quite formidable; forgive it. Farewell, and
believe me, my dear Sir George,

     Your truly affectionate friend,
                   W. WORDSWORTH.[35]

[35] _Memoirs_, vol. i. pp. 345-54, with very important additions from the
original. G.


OF THE INSCRIPTIONS AT COLEORTON.

_Letter to Sir George H. Beaumont, Bart_.

MY DEAR SIR GEORGE,

Had there been room at the end of the small avenue of lime-trees for
planting a spacious circle of the same trees, the urn might have been
placed in the centre, with the inscription thus altered:

    Ye lime-trees, ranged around this hallowed urn,
    Shoot forth with lively power at Spring's return!

       *       *       *       *       *

    Here may some painter sit in future days,
    Some future poet meditate his lays!
    Not mindless of that distant age, renowned,
    When inspiration hovered o'er this ground,
    The haunt of him who sang, how spear and shield
    In civil conflict met on Bosworth field,
    And of that famous youth (full soon removed
    From earth!) by mighty Shakspeare's self approved.
    Fletcher's associate, Jonson's friend beloved.

The first couplet of the above, as it before stood, would have appeared
ludicrous, if the stone had remained after the tree might have been
gone. The couplet relating to the household virtues did not accord with
the painter and the poet; the former being allegorical figures; the
latter, living men.

What follows, I composed yesterday morning, thinking there might be no
impropriety in placing it, so as to be _visible only to a person sitting
within the niche_ which we hollowed out of the sandstone in the
winter-garden. I am told that this is, in the present form of the niche,
impossible; but I shall be most ready, when I come to Coleorton, to
scoop out a place for it, if Lady Beaumont think it worth while.

    INSCRIPTION.

    Oft is the medal faithful to its trust
    When temples, columns, towers, are laid in dust;
    And 'tis a common ordinance of fate
    That things obscure and small outlive the great.
    Hence, &c.

These inscriptions have all one fault, they are too long; but I was
unable to do justice to the thoughts in less room. The second has
brought Sir John Beaumont and his brother Francis so lively to my mind,
that I recur to the plan of republishing the former's poems, perhaps in
connection with those of Francis. Could any further _search_ be made
after the 'Crown of Thorns?' If I recollect right, Southey applied
without effect to the numerous friends he has among the collectors. The
best way, perhaps, of managing this republication would be, to print it
in a very elegant type and paper, and not many copies, to be sold high,
so that it might be prized by the collectors as a curiosity. Bearing in
mind how many excellent things there are in Sir John Beaumont's little
volume, I am somewhat mortified at this mode of honouring his memory;
but in the present state of the taste of this country, I cannot flatter
myself that poems of that character would win their way into general
circulation. Should it appear advisable, another edition might
afterwards be published, upon a plan which would place the book within
the reach of those who have little money to spare. I remain, my dear Sir
George,

              Your affectionate friend,
                    W. WORDSWORTH[36].

[36] _Memoirs_, vol. i, pp. 358-60.


OF POEMS, COLERIDGE, &c. &c.

_Letter to Sir George H. Beaumont, Bart_.

               Grasmere, Sat., Nov. 16. 1811.

MY DEAR SIR GEORGE,

I have to thank you for two letters. Lady Beaumont also will accept my
acknowledgments for the interesting letter with which she favoured me.

       *       *       *       *       *

I learn from Mrs. Coleridge, who has lately heard from C----, that
Alston, the painter, has arrived in London. Coleridge speaks of him as a
most interesting person. He has brought with him a few pictures from his
own pencil, among others, a Cupid and Psyche, which, in C.'s opinion,
has not, for colouring, been surpassed since Titian. C. is about to
deliver a Course of Lectures upon Poetry, at some Institution in the
city. He is well, and I learn that the 'Friend' has been a good deal
inquired after lately. For ourselves, we never hear from him.

I am glad that the inscriptions please you. It did always appear to me,
that inscriptions, particularly those in verse, or in a dead language,
were never supposed _necessarily_ to be the composition of those in
whose name they appeared. If a more striking, or more dramatic effect
could be produced, I have always thought, that in an epitaph or memorial
of any kind, a father, or husband, &c. might be introduced, speaking,
without any absolute deception being intended: that is, the reader is
understood to be at liberty to say to himself,--these verses, or this
Latin, may be the composition of some unknown person, and not that of
the father, widow, or friend, from whose hand or voice they profess to
proceed. If the composition be natural, affecting, or beautiful, it is
all that is required. This, at least, was my view of the subject, or I
should not have adopted that mode. However, in respect to your scruples,
which I feel are both delicate and reasonable, I have altered the
verses; and I have only to regret that the alteration is not more
happily done. But I never found anything more difficult. I wished to
preserve the expression _patrimonial grounds_, but I found this
impossible, on account of the awkwardness of the pronouns, he and his,
as applied to Reynolds, and to yourself. This, even where it does not
produce confusion, is always inelegant. I was, therefore, obliged to
drop it; so that we must be content, I fear, with the inscription as it
stands below. As you mention that the first copy was mislaid, I will
transcribe the first part from that; but you can either choose the Dome
or the Abbey as you like.

    Ye lime-trees, ranged before this hallowed urn,
    Shoot forth with lively power at Spring's return;
    And be not slow a stately growth to rear
    Of pillars, branching off from year to year,
    Till ye have framed, at length, a darksome aisle,
    Like a recess within that sacred pile
    Where Reynolds, 'mid our country's noblest dead,
    In the last sanctity of fame is laid, &c. &c.

I hope this will do: I tried a hundred different ways, but cannot hit
upon anything better. I am sorry to learn from Lady Beaumont, that there
is reason to believe that our cedar is already perished. I am sorry for
it. The verses upon that subject you and Lady B. praise highly; and
certainly, if they have merit, as I cannot but think they have, your
discriminating praises have pointed it out. The alteration in the
beginning, I think with you, is a great improvement, and the first line
is, to my ear, very rich and grateful. As to the 'Female and Male,' I
know not how to get rid of it; for that circumstance gives the recess an
appropriate interest. I remember, Mr. Bowles, the poet, objected to the
word ravishment at the end of the sonnet to the winter-garden; yet it
has the authority of all the first-rate poets, for instance, Milton:

    In whose sight all things joy, with _ravishment_,
    Attracted by thy beauty still to gaze.

Objections upon these grounds merit more attention in regard to
inscriptions than any other sort of composition; and on this account,
the lines (I mean those upon the niche) had better be suppressed, for it
is not improbable that the altering of them might cost me more trouble
than writing a hundred fresh ones.

We were happy to hear that your mother, Lady Beaumont, was so
surprisingly well. You do not mention the school at Coleorton. Pray how
is Wilkie in health, and also as to progress in his art? I do not doubt
that I shall like Arnold's picture; but he would have been a better
painter, if his genius had led him to _read_ more in the early part of
his life. Wilkie's style of painting does not require that the mind
should be fed from books; but I do not think it possible to _excel_ in
_landscape_ painting without a strong tincture of the poetic
spirit.[37]


OF THE INSCRIPTIONS AT COLEORTON.

_Letter to Lady Beaumont_.

                           Grasmere, Wednesday, Nov. 20. 1811.

MY DEAR LADY BEAUMONT,

When you see this you will think I mean to overrun you with
inscriptions: I do not mean to tax you with putting them up, only with
reading them. The following I composed yesterday morning, in a walk from
Brathway, whither I had been to accompany my sister.

    FOR A SEAT IN THE GROVES OF COLEORTON.

    Beneath yon eastern ridge, the craggy bound
    Rugged and high of Charnwood's forest-ground,
    Stand yet, but, Stranger! hidden from thy view,
    The ivied ruins of forlorn Grace Dieu, &c. &c.

I hope that neither you nor Sir George will think that the above takes
from the effect of the mention of Francis Beaumont in the poem upon the
cedar. Grace Dieu is itself so interesting a spot, and has naturally and
historically such a connection with Coleorton, that I could not deny
myself the pleasure of paying it this mark of attention. The thought of
writing the inscription occurred to me many years ago. I took the
liberty of transcribing for Sir George an alteration which I had made in
the inscription for St. Herbert's island; I was not then quite satisfied
with it; I have since retouched it, and will trouble you to read him the
following, which I hope will give you pleasure.

    This island, guarded from profane approach
    By mountains high and waters widely spread,
    Gave to St. Herbert a benign retreat, &c. &c.

I ought to mention, that the line,

    And things of holy use unhallowed lie,

is taken from the following of Daniel,

    Strait all that holy was unhallowed lies.

[37] _Memoirs_, vol. i. pp. 360-3.

I will take this occasion of recommending to you (if you happen to have
Daniel's poems) to read the epistle addressed to the Lady Margaret,
Countess of Cumberland, beginning,

    He that of such a height hath built his mind.

The whole poem is composed in a strain of meditative morality more
dignified and affecting than anything of the kind I ever read. It is,
besides, strikingly applicable to the revolutions of the present times.

My dear Lady Beaumont, your letter and the accounts it contains of the
winter-garden, gave me great pleasure. I cannot but think, that under
your care, it will grow up into one of the most beautiful and
interesting spots in England. We all here have a longing desire to see
it. I have mentioned the high opinion we have of it to a couple of my
friends, persons of taste living in this country, who are determined,
the first time they are called up to London, to turn aside to visit it;
which I said they might without scruple do, if they mentioned my name to
the gardener. My sister begs me to say, that she is aware how long she
has been in your debt, and that she should have written before now, but
that, as I have, latterly, been in frequent communication with
Coleorton, she thought it as well to defer answering your letter. Do you
see the _Courier_ newspaper at Dunmow? I ask on account of a little poem
upon the comet, which I have read in it to-day. Though with several
defects, and some feeble and constrained expressions, it has great
merit, and is far superior to the run, not merely of newspaper, but of
modern poetry in general. I half suspect it to be Coleridge's, for
though it is, in parts, inferior to him, I know no other writer of the
day who can do so well. It consists of five stanzas, in the measure of
the 'Fairy Queen.' It is to be found in last Saturday's paper, November
16th. If you don't see the _Courier_ we will transcribe it for you. As
so much of this letter is taken up with my verses, I will e'en trespass
still further on your indulgence, and conclude with a sonnet, which I
wrote some time ago upon the poet, John Dyer. If you have not read the
'Fleece,' I would strongly recommend it to you. The character of Dyer,
as a patriot, a citizen, and a tender-hearted friend of humanity was, in
some respects, injurious to him as a poet, and has induced him to dwell,
in his poem, upon processes which, however important in themselves,
were unsusceptible of being poetically treated. Accordingly, his poem
is, in several places, dry and heavy; but its beauties are innumerable,
and of a high order. In point of _Imagination_ and purity of style, I am
not sure that he is not superior to any writer in verse since the time
of Milton.

    SONNET.

    Bard of the Fleece! whose skilful genius made
    That work a living landscape fair and bright;
    Nor hallowed less by musical delight
    Than those soft scenes through which thy childhood strayed,
    Those southern tracts of Cambria, deep embayed, &c. &c.

In the above is one whole line from the 'Fleece,' and two other
expressions. When you read the 'Fleece' you will recognise them. I
remain, my dear Lady Beaumont,

         Your sincere friend,
              W. WORDSWORTH.[38]

[38] _Memoirs_, vol. i. pp. 363-6.


EXCURSION IN NORTH WALES.

_Letter to Sir George H. Beaumont_.

     Hindwell, Radnor, Sept. 20. 1824. MY DEAR SIR GEORGE,

After a three weeks' ramble in North Wales, Mrs. Wordsworth, Dora, and
myself are set down quietly here for three weeks more. The weather has
been delightful, and everything to our wishes. On a beautiful day we
took the steam-packet at Liverpool, passed the mouth of the Dee, coasted
the extremity of the Vale of Clwyd, sailed close under Great Orm's Head,
had a noble prospect of Penmaenmawr, and having almost touched upon
Puffin's Island, we reached Bangor Ferry, a little after six in the
afternoon. We admired the stupendous preparations for the bridge over
the Menai; and breakfasted next morning at Carnarvon. We employed
several hours in exploring the interior of the noble castle, and looking
at it from different points of view in the neighbourhood. At half-past
four we departed for Llanberris, having fine views as we looked back of
C. Castle, the sea, and Anglesey. A little before sunset we came in
sight of Llanberris Lake, Snowdon, and all the craggy hills and
mountains surrounding it; the foreground a beautiful contrast to this
grandeur and desolation--a green sloping hollow, furnishing a shelter
for one of the most beautiful collections of lowly Welsh cottages, with
thatched roofs, overgrown with plants, anywhere to be met with: the
hamlet is called Cum-y-glo. And here we took boat, while the solemn
lights of evening were receding towards the tops of the mountains. As we
advanced, Dolbardin Castle came in view, and Snowdon opened upon our
admiration. It was almost dark when we reached the quiet and comfortable
inn at Llanberris.

       *       *       *       *       *

There being no carriage-road, we undertook to walk by the Pass of
Llanberris, eight miles, to Capel Cerig; this proved fatiguing, but it
was the only oppressive exertion we made during the course of our tour.
We arrived at Capel Cerig in time for a glance at the Snowdonian range,
from the garden of the inn, in connection with the lake (or rather pool)
reflecting the crimson clouds of evening. The outline of Snowdon is
perhaps seen nowhere to more advantage than from this place. Next
morning, five miles down a beautiful valley to the banks of the Conway,
which stream we followed to Llanrwst; but the day was so hot that we
could only make use of the morning and evening. Here we were joined,
according to previous arrangement, by Bishop Hobart, of New York, who
remained with us till two o'clock next day, and left us to complete his
hasty tour through North and South Wales. In the afternoon arrived my
old college friend and youthful companion among the Alps, the Rev. R.
Jones, and in his car we all proceeded to the Falls of the Conway,
thence up that river to a newly-erected inn on the Irish road, where we
lodged; having passed through bold and rocky scenery along the banks of
a stream which is a feeder of the Dee. Next morning we turned from the
Irish road three or four miles to visit the 'Valley of Meditation' (Glyn
Mavyr) where Mr. Jones has, at present, a curacy, with a comfortable
parsonage. We slept at Corwen, and went down the Dee to Llangollen,
which you and dear Lady B. know well. Called upon the celebrated
Recluses,[39] who hoped that you and Lady B. had not forgotten them;
they certainly had not forgotten you, and they begged us to say that
they retained a lively remembrance of you both. We drank tea and passed
a couple of hours with them in the evening, having visited the aqueduct
over the Dee and Chirk Castle in the afternoon. Lady E. has not been
well, and has suffered much in her eyes, but she is surprisingly lively
for her years. Miss P. is apparently in unimpaired health. Next day I
sent them the following sonnet from Ruthin, which was conceived, and in
a great measure composed, in their grounds.

[39] The Lady E. Butler, and the Hon. Miss Ponsonby.

    A stream, to mingle with your favourite Dee,
    Along the _Vale of Meditation_ flows;
    So named by those fierce Britons, pleased to see
    In Nature's face the expression of repose, &c. &c.

We passed three days with Mr. Jones's friends in the vale of Clwyd,
looking about us, and on the Tuesday set off again, accompanied by our
friend, to complete our tour. We dined at Conway, walked to Bennarth,
the view from which is a good deal choked up with wood. A small part of
the castle has been demolished for the sake of the new road to
communicate with the suspension-bridge, which they are about to make to
the small island opposite the castle, to be connected by a long
embankment with the opposite shore. The bridge will, I think, prove
rather ornamental when time has taken off the newness of its supporting
masonry; but the mound deplorably impairs the majesty of the water at
high-tide; in fact it destroys its lake-like appearance. Our drive to
Aber in the evening was charming; sun setting in glory. We had also a
delightful walk next morning up the vale of Aber, terminated by a lofty
waterfall; not much in itself, but most striking as a closing
accompaniment to the secluded valley. Here, in the early morning, I saw
an odd sight--fifteen milk-maids together, laden with their brimming
pails. How cheerful and happy they appeared! and not a little inclined
to joke after the manner of the pastoral persons in Theocritus. That day
brought us to Capel Cerig again, after a charming drive up the banks of
the Ogwen, having previously had beautiful views of Bangor, the sea, and
its shipping. From Capel Cerig down the justly celebrated vale of Nant
Gwynant to Bethgelart. In this vale are two small lakes, the higher of
which is the only Welsh lake which has any pretensions to compare with
our own; and it has one great advantage over them, that it remains
wholly free from intrusive objects. We saw it early in the morning; and
with the greenness of the meadows at its head, the steep rocks on one of
its shores, and the bold mountains at _both_ extremities, a feature
almost peculiar to itself, it appeared to us truly enchanting. The
village of Bethgelart is much altered for the worse: new and formal
houses have, in a great measure, supplanted the old rugged and tufted
cottages, and a smart hotel has taken the lead of the lowly public-house
in which I took refreshment almost thirty years ago, previous to a
midnight ascent to the summit of Snowdon. At B. we were agreeably
surprised by the appearance of Mr. Hare, of New College, Oxford. We
slept at Tan-y-bylch, having employed the afternoon in exploring the
beauties of the vale of Festiniog. Next day to Barmouth, whence, the
following morning, we took boat and rowed up its sublime estuary, which
may compare with the finest of Scotland, having the advantage of a
superior climate. From Dolgelly we went to Tal-y-llyn, a solitary and
very interesting lake under Cader Idris. Next day, being Sunday, we
heard service performed in Welsh, and in the afternoon went part of the
way down a beautiful valley to Machynleth, next morning to Aberystwith,
and up the Rhydiol to the Devil's Bridge, where we passed the following
day in exploring those two rivers, and Hafod in the neighbourhood. I had
seen these things long ago, but either my memory or my powers of
observation had not done them justice. It rained heavily in the night,
and we saw the waterfalls in perfection. While Dora was attempting to
make a sketch from the chasm in the rain, I composed by her side the
following address to the torrent:

    How art thou named? In search of what strange land,
    From what huge height descending? Can such force
    Of water issue from a British source?

Next day, viz. last Wednesday, we reached this place, and found all our
friends well, except our good and valuable friend, Mr. Monkhouse, who is
here, and in a very alarming state of health. His physicians have
ordered him to pass the winter in Devonshire, fearing a consumption; but
he is certainly not suffering under a regular hectic pulmonary decline:
his pulse is good, so is his appetite, and he has no fever, but is
deplorably emaciated. He is a near relation of Mrs. W., and one, as you
know, of my best friends. I hope to see Mr. Price, at Foxley, in a few
days. Mrs. W.'s brother is about to change his present residence for a
farm close by Foxley.

Now, my dear Sir George, what chance is there of your being in Wales
during any part of the autumn? I would strain a point to meet you
anywhere, were it only for a couple of days. Write immediately, or
should you be absent without Lady B. she will have the goodness to tell
me of your movements. I saw the Lowthers just before I set off, all
well. You probably have heard from my sister. It is time to make an end
of this long letter, which might have been somewhat less dry if I had
not wished to make you master of our whole route. Except ascending one
of the high mountains, Snowdon or Cader Idris, we omitted nothing, and
saw as much as the shortened days would allow. With love to Lady B. and
yourself, dear Sir George, from us all, I remain, ever,

                    Most faithfully yours,
                        WM. WORDSWORTH.[40]

[40] _Memoirs_, vol. ii. pp. 121--7.




(g) LETTER TO THE RIGHT HON. CHARLES JAMES FOX.

_With the 'Lyrical Ballads'_ (1801): _with critical Remarks on his
Poems_.

           Grasmere, Westmoreland, January 14th. 1801.

SIR,

It is not without much difficulty that I have summoned the courage to
request your acceptance of these volumes. Should I express my real
feelings, I am sure that I should seem to make a parade of diffidence
and humility.

Several of the poems contained in these volumes are written upon
subjects which are the common property of all poets, and which, at some
period of your life, must have been interesting to a man of your
sensibility, and perhaps may still continue to be so. It would be highly
gratifying to me to suppose that even in a single instance the manner in
which I have treated these general topics should afford you any
pleasure; but such a hope does not influence me upon the present
occasion; in truth I do not feel it. Besides, I am convinced that there
must be many things in this collection which may impress you with an
unfavourable idea of my intellectual powers. I do not say this with a
wish to degrade myself, but I am sensible that this must be the case,
from the different circles in which we have moved, and the different
objects with which we have been conversant.

Being utterly unknown to you as I am, I am well aware that if I am
justified in writing to you at all, it is necessary my letter should be
short; but I have feelings within me, which I hope will so far show
themselves, as to excuse the trespass which I am afraid I shall make.

In common with the whole of the English people, I have observed in your
public character a constant predominance of sensibility of heart.
Necessitated as you have been from your public situation to have much to
do with men in bodies, and in classes, and accordingly to contemplate
them in that relation, it has been your praise that you have not thereby
been prevented from looking upon them as individuals, and that you have
habitually left your heart open to be influenced by them in that
capacity. This habit cannot but have made you dear to poets; and I am
sure that if, since your first entrance into public life, there has been
a single true poet living in England, he must have loved you.

But were I assured that I myself had a just claim to the title of a
poet, all the dignity being attached to the word which belongs to it, I
do not think that I should have ventured for that reason to offer these
volumes to you; at present it is solely on account of two poems in the
second volume, the one entitled 'The Brothers,' and the other 'Michael,'
that I have been emboldened to take this liberty.

It appears to me that the most calamitous effect which has followed the
measures which have lately been pursued in this country, is, a rapid
decay of the domestic affections among the lower orders of society. This
effect the present rulers of this country are not conscious of, or they
disregard it. For many years past, the tendency of society, amongst
almost all the nations of Europe, has been to produce it; but recently,
by the spreading of manufactures through every part of the country, by
the heavy taxes upon postage, by workhouses, houses of industry, and the
invention of soup-shops, &c., superadded to the increasing disproportion
between the price of labour and that of the necessaries of life, the
bonds of domestic feeling among the poor, as far as the influence of
these things has extended, have been weakened, and in innumerable
instances entirely destroyed. The evil would be the less to be
regretted, if these institutions were regarded only as palliatives to a
disease; but the vanity and pride of their promoters are so subtly
interwoven with them, that they are deemed great discoveries and
blessings to humanity. In the meantime, parents are separated from their
children, and children from their parents; the wife no longer prepares,
with her own hands, a meal for her husband, the produce of his labour;
there is little doing in his house in which his affections can be
interested, and but little left in it that he can love. I have two
neighbours, a man and his wife, both upwards of eighty years of age.
They live alone. The husband has been confined to his bed many months,
and has never had, nor till within these few weeks has ever needed, any
body to attend to him but his wife. She has recently been seized with a
lameness which has often prevented her from being able to carry him his
food to his bed. The neighbours fetch water for her from the well, and
do other kind offices for them both. But her infirmities increase. She
told my servant two days ago, that she was afraid they must both be
boarded out among some other poor of the parish (they have long been
supported by the parish); but she said it was hard, having kept house
together so long, to come to this, and she was sure that 'it would burst
her heart.' I mention this fact to show how deeply the spirit of
independence is, even yet, rooted in some parts of the country. These
people could not express themselves in this way without an almost
sublime conviction of the blessings of independent domestic life. If it
is true, as I believe, that this spirit is rapidly disappearing, no
greater curse can befall a Land.

I earnestly entreat your pardon for having detained you so long. In the
two poems, 'The Brothers,' and 'Michael,' I have attempted to draw a
picture of the domestic affections, as I know they exist among a class
of men who are now almost confined to the north of England. They are
small independent _proprietors_ of land, here called statesmen, men of
respectable education, who daily labour on their own little properties.
The domestic affections will always be strong amongst men who live in a
country not crowded with population, if these men are placed above
poverty. But if they are proprietors of small estates, which have
descended to them from their ancestors, the power, which these
affections will acquire amongst such men, is inconceivable by those who
have only had an opportunity of observing hired labourers, farmers, and
the manufacturing poor. Their little tract of land serves as a kind of
permanent rallying point for their domestic feelings, as a tablet upon
which they are written, which makes them objects of memory in a thousand
instances, when they would otherwise be forgotten. It is a fountain
fitted to the nature of social man, from which supplies of affection, as
pure as his heart was intended for, are daily drawn. This class of men
is rapidly disappearing. You, Sir, have a consciousness, upon which
every good man will congratulate you, that the whole of your public
conduct has, in one way or other, been directed to the preservation of
this class of men, and those who hold similar situations. You have felt
that the most sacred of all property is the property of the poor. The
two poems, which I have mentioned, were written with a view to show
that men who do not wear fine clothes can feel deeply. 'Pectus enim est
quod disertos facit, et vis mentis. Ideoque imperitis quoque, si modo
sint aliquo affectu concitati, verba non desunt.' The poems are faithful
copies from Nature; and I hope whatever effect they may have upon you,
you will at least be able to perceive that they may excite profitable
sympathies in many kind and good hearts, and may in some small degree
enlarge our feelings of reverence for our species, and our knowledge of
human nature, by showing that our best qualities are possessed by men
whom we are too apt to consider, not with reference to the points in
which they resemble us, but to those in which they manifestly differ
from us. I thought, at a time when these feelings are sapped in so many
ways, that the two poems might co-operate, however feebly, with the
illustrious efforts which you have made to stem this and other evils
with which the country is labouring; and it is on this account alone
that I have taken the liberty of thus addressing you.

Wishing earnestly that the time may come when the country may perceive
what it has lost by neglecting your advice, and hoping that your latter
days may be attended with health and comfort,

          I remain,
            With the highest respect and admiration,
            Your most obedient and humble servant,
                        W. WORDSWORTH.[41]

Fox's reply was as follows:

SIR,

I owe you many apologies for having so long deferred thanking you for
your poems, and your obliging letter accompanying them, which I received
early in March. The poems have given me the greatest pleasure; and if I
were obliged to choose out of them, I do not know whether I should not
say that 'Harry Gill,' 'We are Seven,' 'The Mad Mother,' and 'The
Idiot,' are my favourites. I read with particular attention the two you
pointed out; but whether it be from early prepossessions, or whatever
other cause, I am no great friend to blank verse for subjects which are
to be treated of with simplicity.

[41] _Memoirs_, vol. i. pp. 166--171.

You will excuse my stating my opinion to you so freely, which I should
not do if I did not really admire many of the poems in the collection,
and many parts even of those in blank verse. Of the poems which you
state not to be yours, that entitled 'Love' appears to me to be the
best, and I do not know who is the author. 'The Nightingale' I
understand to be Mr. Coleridge's, who combats, I think, very
successfully, the mistaken prejudice of the nightingale's note being
melancholy. I am, with great truth,

    Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
          C. J. Fox.[42]

St. Ann's Hill, May 25. [1801.]

[42] _Memoirs_, vol. i. pp. 171--2.

       *       *       *       *       *

In connection with the above the following observations addressed by
Wordsworth to some friends fitly find a place here.

Speaking of the poem of the _Leech-Gatherer_,[43] sent in MS., he says:

     'It is not a matter of indifference whether you are pleased with
     his figure and employment, it may be comparatively whether you are
     pleased with _this Poem_; but it is of the utmost importance that
     you should have had pleasure in contemplating the fortitude,
     independence, persevering spirit, and the general moral dignity of
     this old man's character.'

[43] Entitled 'Resolution and Independence.'

And again, on the same poem:

     'I will explain to you, in prose, my feelings in writing _that_
     poem.... I describe myself as having been exalted to the highest
     pitch of delight by the joyousness and beauty of Nature; and then
     as depressed, even in the midst of those beautiful objects, to the
     lowest dejection and despair. A young poet in the midst of the
     happiness of Nature is described as overwhelmed by the thoughts of
     the miserable reverses which have befallen the happiest of all men,
     viz. poets. I think of this till I am so deeply impressed with it,
     that I consider the manner in which I was rescued from my dejection
     and despair almost as an interposition of Providence. A person
     reading the poem with feelings like mine will have been awed and
     controlled, expecting something spiritual or supernatural. What is
     brought forward? A lonely place, "a pond, by which an old man
     _was_, far from all house or home:" not _stood_, nor _sat_, but
     _was_--the figure presented in the most naked simplicity possible.
     This feeling of spirituality or supernaturalness is again referred
     to as being strong in my mind in this passage. How came he here?
     thought I, or what can he be doing? I then describe him, whether
     ill or well is not for me to judge with perfect confidence; but
     this I _can_ confidently affirm, that though I believe God has
     given me a strong imagination, I cannot conceive a figure more
     impressive than that of an old man like this, the survivor of a
     wife and ten children, travelling alone among the mountains and all
     lonely places, carrying with him his own fortitude and the
     necessities which an unjust state of society has laid upon him. You
     speak of his speech as tedious. Everything is tedious when one does
     not read with the feelings of the author. "The Thorn" is tedious to
     hundreds; and so is the "Idiot Boy" to hundreds. It is in the
     character of the old man to tell his story, which an impatient
     reader must feel tedious. But, good heavens! such a figure, in such
     a place; a pious, self-respecting, miserably infirm and pleased old
     man telling such a tale!

     'Your feelings upon the "Mother and the Boy, with the Butterfly,"
     were not indifferent: it was an affair of whole continents of moral
     sympathy.'

     'I am for the most part uncertain about my success in _altering_
     poems; but in this case,' speaking of an insertion, 'I am sure I
     have produced a great improvement.'[44]

[44] _Memoirs_, vol. i. pp. 166--174.




(_h_) OF THE PRINCIPLES OF POETRY AND HIS OWN POEMS.

_Letter to (afterwards) Professor John Wilson_ ['_Christopher North_'].

_To_ ----.

MY DEAR SIR,

Had it not been for a very amiable modesty you could not have imagined
that your letter could give me any offence. It was on many accounts
highly grateful to me. I was pleased to find that I had given so much
pleasure to an ingenuous and able mind, and I further considered the
enjoyment which you had had from my Poems as an earnest that others
might be delighted with them in the same, or a like manner. It is plain
from your letter that the pleasure which I have given you has not been
blind or unthinking; you have studied the poems, and prove that you have
entered into the spirit of them. They have not given you a cheap or
vulgar pleasure; therefore, I feel that you are entitled to my kindest
thanks for having done some violence to your natural diffidence in the
communication which you have made to me.

There is scarcely any part of your letter that does not deserve
particular notice; but partly from some constitutional infirmities, and
partly from certain habits of mind, I do not write any letters unless
upon business, not even to my dearest friends. Except during absence
from my own family I have not written five letters of friendship during
the last five years. I have mentioned this in order that I may retain
your good opinion, should my letter be less minute than you are entitled
to expect. You seem to be desirous of my opinion on the influence of
natural objects in forming the character of Nations. This cannot be
understood without first considering their influence upon men in
general, first, with reference to such objects as are common to all
countries; and, next, such as belong exclusively to any particular
country, or in a greater degree to it than to another. Now it is
manifest that no human being can be so besotted and debased by
oppression, penury, or any other evil which unhumanises man, as to be
utterly insensible to the colours, forms, or smell of flowers, the
(voices)[45] and motions of birds and beasts, the appearances of the sky
and heavenly bodies, the general warmth of a fine day, the terror and
uncomfortableness of a storm, &c. &c. How dead soever many full-grown
men may outwardly seem to these things, all are more or less affected by
them; and in childhood, in the first practice and exercise of their
senses, they must have been not the nourishers merely, but often the
fathers of their passions. There cannot be a doubt that in tracts of
country where images of danger, melancholy, grandeur, or loveliness,
softness, and ease prevail, that they will make themselves felt
powerfully in forming the characters of the people, so as to produce an
uniformity or national character, where the nation is small and is not
made up of men who, inhabiting different soils, climates, &c., by their
civil usages and relations materially interfere with each other. It was
so formerly, no doubt, in the Highlands of Scotland; but we cannot
perhaps observe much of it in our own island at the present day,
because, even in the most sequestered places, by manufactures, traffic,
religion, law, interchange of inhabitants, &c., distinctions are done
away, which would otherwise have been strong and obvious. This complex
state of society does not, however, prevent the characters of
individuals from frequently receiving a strong bias, not merely from the
impressions of general Nature, but also from local objects and images.
But it seems that to produce these effects, in the degree in which we
frequently find them to be produced, there must be a peculiar
sensibility of original organisation combining with moral accidents, as
is exhibited in 'The Brothers' and in 'Ruth;' I mean, to produce this in
a marked degree; not that I believe that any man was ever brought up in
the country without loving it, especially in his better moments, or in a
district of particular grandeur or beauty without feeling some stronger
attachment to it on that account than he would otherwise have felt. I
include, you will observe, in these considerations, the influence of
climate, changes in the atmosphere and elements, and the labours and
occupations which particular districts require.


[45] Parts of this letter have been torn, and words have been lost; some
of which are here conjecturally supplied between brackets.

You begin what you say upon the 'Idiot Boy,' with this observation, that
nothing is a fit subject for poetry which does not please. But here
follows a question, Does not please whom? Some have little knowledge of
natural imagery of any kind, and, of course, little relish for it; some
are disgusted with the very mention of the words pastoral poetry, sheep
or shepherds; some cannot tolerate a poem with a ghost or any
supernatural agency in it; others would shrink from an animated
description of the pleasures of love, as from a thing carnal and
libidinous; some cannot bear to see delicate and refined feelings
ascribed to men in low conditions in society, because their vanity and
self-love tell them that these belong only to themselves, and men like
themselves in dress, station, and way of life; others are disgusted with
the naked language of some of the most interesting passions of men,
because either it is indelicate, or gross, or vulgar; as many fine
ladies could not bear certain expressions in the 'Mother' and the
'Thorn,' and, as in the instance of Adam Smith, who, we are told, could
not endure the ballad of 'Clym of the Clough,' because the author had
not written like a gentleman. Then there are professional and national
prejudices for evermore. Some take no interest in the description of a
particular passion or quality, as love of solitariness, we will say,
genial activity of fancy, love of Nature, religion, and so forth,
because they have [little or] nothing of it in themselves; and so on
without end. I return then to [the] question, please whom? or what? I
answer, human nature as it has been (and ever) will be. But where are we
to find the best measure of this? I answer, [from with] in; by stripping
our own hearts naked, and by looking out of ourselves to [wards men] who
lead the simplest lives, and most according to Nature; men who have
never known false refinements, wayward and artificial desires, false
criticisms, effeminate habits of thinking and feeling, or who having
known these things have outgrown them. This latter class is the most to
be depended upon, but it is very small in number. People in our rank in
life are perpetually falling into one sad mistake, namely, that of
supposing that human nature and the persons they associate with are one
and the same thing. Whom do we generally associate with? Gentlemen,
persons of fortune, professional men, ladies, persons who can afford to
buy, or can easily procure books of half-a-guinea price, hot-pressed,
and printed upon superfine paper. These persons are, it is true, a part
of human nature, but we err lamentably if we suppose them to be fair
representatives of the vast mass of human existence. And yet few ever
consider books but with reference to their power of pleasing these
persons and men of a higher rank; few descend lower, among cottages and
fields, and among children. A man must have done this habitually before
his judgment upon the 'Idiot Boy' would be in any way decisive with me.
I _know_ I have done this myself habitually; I wrote the poem with
exceeding delight and pleasure, and whenever I read it I read it with
pleasure. You have given me praise for having reflected faithfully in my
Poems the feelings of human nature. I would fain hope that I have done
so. But a great Poet ought to do more than this; he ought, to a certain
degree, to rectify men's feelings, to give them new compositions of
feeling, to render their feelings more sane, pure, and permanent, in
short, more consonant to Nature, that is, to eternal Nature, and the
great moving Spirit of things. He ought to travel before men
occasionally as well as at their sides. I may illustrate this by a
reference to natural objects. What false notions have prevailed from
generation to generation of the true character of the Nightingale. As
far as my Friend's Poem, in the 'Lyrical Ballads,' is read, it will
contribute greatly to rectify these. You will recollect a passage in
Cowper, where, speaking of rural sounds, he says,

          And _even_ the boding Owl
    That hails the rising moon has charms for me.

Cowper was passionately fond of natural objects, yet you see he mentions
it as a marvellous thing that he could connect pleasure with the cry of
the owl. In the same poem he speaks in the same manner of that beautiful
plant, the gorse; making in some degree an amiable boast of his loving
it _'unsightly'_ and unsmooth as it is. There are many aversions of this
kind, which, though they have some foundation in nature, have yet so
slight a one, that, though they may have prevailed hundreds of years, a
philosopher will look upon them as accidents. So with respect to many
moral feelings, either of love or dislike. What excessive admiration was
paid in former times to personal prowess and military success; it is so
with the latter even at the present day, but surely not nearly so much
as heretofore. So with regard to birth, and innumerable other modes of
sentiment, civil and religious. But you will be inclined to ask by this
time how all this applies to the 'Idiot Boy.' To this I can only say
that the loathing and disgust which many people have at the sight of an
idiot, is a feeling which, though having some foundation in human
nature, is not necessarily attached to it in any virtuous degree, but is
owing in a great measure to a false delicacy, and, if I may say it
without rudeness, a certain want of comprehensiveness of thinking and
feeling. Persons in the lower classes of society have little or nothing
of this: if an idiot is born in a poor man's house, it must be taken
care of, and cannot be boarded out, as it would be by gentlefolks, or
sent to a public or private receptacle for such unfortunate beings.
[Poor people] seeing frequently among their neighbours such objects,
easily [forget] whatever there is of natural disgust about them, and
have [therefore] a sane state, so that without pain or suffering they
[perform] their duties towards them. I could with pleasure pursue this
subject, but I must now strictly adopt the plan which I proposed to
myself when I began to write this letter, namely, that of setting down a
few hints or memorandums, which you will think of for my sake.

I have often applied to idiots, in my own mind, that sublime expression
of Scripture that _'their life is hidden with God.'_ They are
worshipped, probably from a feeling of this sort, in several parts of
the East. Among the Alps, where they are numerous, they are considered,
I believe, as a blessing to the family to which they belong. I have,
indeed, often looked upon the conduct of fathers and mothers of the
lower classes of society towards idiots as the great triumph of the
human heart. It is there that we see the strength, disinterestedness,
and grandeur of love; nor have I ever been able to contemplate an object
that calls out so many excellent and virtuous sentiments without finding
it hallowed thereby, and having something in me which bears down before
it, like a deluge, every feeble sensation of disgust and aversion.

There are, in my opinion, several important mistakes in the latter part
of your letter which I could have wished to notice; but I find myself
much fatigued. These refer both to the Boy and the Mother. I must
content myself simply with observing that it is probable that the
principal cause of your dislike to this particular poem lies in the
_word_ Idiot. If there had been any such word in our language, _to which
we had attached passion_, as lack-wit, half-wit, witless, &c., I should
have certainly employed it in preference; but there is no such word.
Observe (this is entirely in reference to this particular poem), my
'Idiot' is not one of those who cannot articulate, and such as are
usually disgusting in their persons:

    Whether in cunning or in joy,
    And then his words were not a few, &c._

and the last speech at the end of the poem. The 'Boy' whom I had in my
mind was by no means disgusting in his appearance, quite the contrary;
and I have known several with imperfect faculties, who are handsome in
their persons and features. There is one, at present, within a mile of
my own house, remarkably so, though [he has something] of a stare and
vacancy in his countenance. A friend of mine, knowing that some persons
had a dislike to the poem, such as you have expressed, advised me to add
a stanza, describing the person of the Boy [so as] entirely to separate
him in the imaginations of my readers from that class of idiots who are
disgusting in their persons; but the narration in the poem is so rapid
and impassioned, that I could not find a place in which to insert the
stanza without checking the progress of it, and [so leaving] a deadness
upon the feeling. This poem has, I know, frequently produced the same
effect as it did upon you and your friends; but there are many also to
whom it affords exquisite delight, and who, indeed, prefer it to any
other of my poems. This proves that the feelings there delineated are
such as men _may_ sympathise with. This is enough for my purpose. It is
not enough for me as a Poet, to delineate merely such feelings as all
men _do_ sympathise with; but it is also highly desirable to add to
these others, such as all men _may_ sympathise with, and such as there
is reason to believe they would be better and more moral beings if they
did sympathise with.

I conclude with regret, because I have not said one half of [what I
intended] to say; but I am sure you will deem my excuse sufficient,
[when I] inform you that my head aches violently, and I am in other
respects unwell. I must, however, again give you my warmest thanks for
your kind letter. I shall be happy to hear from you again: and do not
think it unreasonable that I should request a letter from you, when I
feel that the answer which I may make to it will not perhaps be above
three or four lines. This I mention to you with frankness, and you will
not take it ill after what I have before said of my remissness in
writing letters.

           I am, dear Sir,
           With great respect,
           Yours sincerely,
                W. WORDSWORTH.[46]

[46] _Memoirs_, vol. i. pp. 192--200.




IV. DESCRIPTIVE.

(_a_) A GUIDE THROUGH THE DISTRICT OF THE LAKES.

(_b_) LETTERS, &c, ON KENDAL AND WINDERMERE RAILWAY.

NOTE.

See Preface in Vol. I. for details on the 'Guide' and these Letters. G.




A =GUIDE= THROUGH THE =DISTRICT OF THE LAKES= IN The North of England.
WITH =A DESCRIPTION OF THE SCENERY, &c.= FOR THE USE OF =TOURISTS AND
RESIDENTS=.


       *       *       *       *       *

=FIFTH EDITION=, WITH CONSIDERABLE ADDITIONS.

       *       *       *       *       *


=BY WILLIAM WORDSWORTH=.




_KENDAL:_

PUBLISHED BY HUDSON AND NICHOLSON,

AND IN LONDON BY

LONGMAN & CO., MOXON, AND WHITTAKER & CO.

1835.




CONTENTS.

       *       *       *       *       *

DIRECTIONS AND INFORMATION FOR THE TOURIST.

Windermere.--Ambleside.--Coniston.--Ulpha Kirk.--Road from Ambleside to
Keswick.--Grasmere.--The Vale of Keswick.--Buttermere and
Crummock.--Lowes-water.--Wastdale.--Ullswater, with its tributary
Streams.--Haweswater, &c.

DESCRIPTION OF THE SCENERY OF THE LAKES.

SECTION FIRST.

VIEW OR THE COUNTRY AS FORMED BY NATURE.

Vales diverging from a common Centre.--Effect of Light and Shadow as
dependant upon the Position of the Vales.--Mountains,--their
Substance,--Surfaces,--and Colours.--Winter Colouring.--The
Vales,--Lakes,--Islands,--Tarns,--Woods,--Rivers,--Climate,--Night....
p. 235

SECTION SECOND.

ASPECT OF THE COUNTRY AS AFFECTED BY ITS INHABITANTS.

Retrospect.--Primitive Aspect.--Roman and British Antiquities.--Feudal
Tenantry,--their Habitations and Enclosures--Tenantry reduced in Number
by the Union of the Two Crowns.--State of Society after that
Event.--Cottages,--Bridges,--Places of Worship,--Parks and
Mansions.--General Picture of Society.... 256

SECTION THIRD.

CHANGES, AND RULES OF TASTE FOR PREVENTING THEIR BAD EFFECTS.

Tourists.--New Settlers.--The Country disfigured.--Causes of
false Taste in Grounds and Buildings.--Ancient Models
recommended.--Houses.--Colouring of Buildings.--Grounds and
Plantations.--The Larch.--Planting.--Further Changes
Probable.--Conclusion.... 269

MISCELLANEOUS OBSERVATIONS.

Time for visiting the Country.--Order in which Objects should be
approached.--Views from the Heights.--Comparisons, how
injurious.--Alpine Scenes compared with Cumbrian,
&c.--Phenomena.--Comparative Estimate.... 287

EXCURSIONS

TO THE TOP OF SCAWFELL AND ON THE BANKS OF ULLSWATER, p. 302.

ODE.

THE PASS OF KIRKSTONE, p. 314.

ITINERARY,

p. 316.




DIRECTIONS AND INFORMATION FOR THE TOURIST.

In preparing this Manual, it was the Author's principal wish to furnish
a Guide or Companion for the _Minds_ of Persons of taste, and feeling
for Landscape, who might be inclined to explore the District of the
Lakes with that degree of attention to which its beauty may fairly lay
claim. For the more sure attainment, however, of this primary object, he
will begin by undertaking the humble and tedious task of supplying the
Tourist with directions how to approach the several scenes in their
best, or most convenient, order. But first, supposing the approach to be
made from the south, and through Yorkshire, there are certain
interesting spots which may be confidently recommended to his notice, if
time can be spared before entering upon the Lake District; and the route
may be changed in returning.

There are three approaches to the Lakes through Yorkshire; the least
adviseable is the great north road by Catterick and Greta Bridge, and
onwards to Penrith. The Traveller, however, taking this route, might
halt at Greta Bridge, and be well recompenced if he can afford to give
an hour or two to the banks of the Greta, and of the Tees, at Rokeby.
Barnard Castle also, about two miles up the Tees, is a striking object,
and the main North Road might be rejoined at Bowes. Every one has heard
of the great Fall of the Tees above Middleham, interesting for its
grandeur, as the avenue of rocks that leads to it, is to the geologist.
But this place lies so far out of the way as scarcely to be within the
compass of our notice. It might, however, be visited by a Traveller on
foot, or on horseback, who could rejoin the main road upon Stanemoor.

The second road leads through a more interesting tract of country,
beginning at Ripon, from which place see Fountain's Abbey, and thence by
Hackfall, and Masham, to Jervaux Abbey, and up the vale of Wensley;
turning aside before Askrigg is reached, to see Aysgarth-force, upon the
Ure; and again, near Hawes, to Hardraw Scar, of which, with its
waterfall, Turner has a fine drawing. Thence over the fells to
Sedbergh, and Kendal.

The third approach from Yorkshire is through Leeds. Four miles beyond
that town are the ruins of Kirkstall Abbey, should that road to Skipton
be chosen; but the other by Otley may be made much more interesting by
turning off at Addington to Bolton Bridge, for the sake of visiting the
Abbey and grounds. It would be well, however, for a party previously to
secure beds, if wanted, at the inn, as there is but one, and it is much
resorted to in summer.

The Traveller on foot, or horseback, would do well to follow the banks
of the Wharf upwards, to Burnsall, and thence cross over the hills to
Gordale--a noble scene, beautifully described in Gray's Tour, and with
which no one can be disappointed. Thence to Malham, where there is a
respectable village inn, and so on, by Malham Cove, to Settle.

Travellers in carriages must go from Bolton Bridge to Skipton, where
they rejoin the main road; and should they be inclined to visit Gordale,
a tolerable road turns off beyond Skipton. Beyond Settle, under
Giggleswick Scar, the road passes an ebbing and flowing well, worthy the
notice of the Naturalist. Four miles to the right of Ingleton, is
Weathercote Cave, a fine object, but whoever diverges for this, must
return to Ingleton. Near Kirkby Lonsdale observe the view from the
bridge over the Lune, and descend to the channel of the river, and by no
means omit looking at the Vale of Lune from the Church-yard.

The journey towards the Lake country through Lancashire, is, with the
exception of the Vale of the Ribble, at Preston, uninteresting; till you
come near Lancaster, and obtain a view of the fells and mountains of
Lancashire and Westmoreland; with Lancaster Castle, and the Tower of the
Church seeming to make part of the Castle, in the foreground.

They who wish to see the celebrated ruins of Furness Abbey, and are not
afraid of crossing the Sands, may go from Lancaster to Ulverston; from
which place take the direct road to Dalton; but by all means return
through Urswick, for the sake of the view from the top of the hill,
before descending into the grounds of Conishead Priory. From this
quarter the Lakes would be advantageously approached by Coniston; thence
to Hawkshead, and by the Ferry over Windermere, to Bowness: a much
better introduction than by going direct from Coniston to Ambleside,
which ought not to be done, as that would greatly take off from the
effect of Windermere.

Let us now go back to Lancaster. The direct road thence to Kendal is 22
miles, but by making a circuit of eight miles, the Vale of the Lune to
Kirkby Lonsdale will be included. The whole tract is pleasing; there is
one view mentioned by Gray and Mason especially so. In West's Guide it
is thus pointed out:--'About a quarter of a mile beyond the third
mile-stone, where the road makes a turn to the right, there is a gate on
the left which leads into a field where the station meant, will be
found.' Thus far for those who approach the Lakes from the South.

Travellers from the North would do well to go from Carlisle by Wigton,
and proceed along the Lake of Bassenthwaite to Keswick; or, if
convenience should take them first to Penrith, it would still be better
to cross the country to Keswick, and begin with that vale, rather than
with Ulswater. It is worth while to mention, in this place, that the
banks of the river Eden, about Corby, are well worthy of notice, both on
account of their natural beauty, and the viaducts which have recently
been carried over the bed of the river, and over a neighbouring ravine.
In the Church of Wetherby, close by, is a fine piece of monumental
sculpture by Nollekens. The scenes of Nunnery, upon the Eden, or rather
that part of them which is upon Croglin, a mountain stream there falling
into the Eden, are, in their way, unrivalled. But the nearest road
thither, from Corby, is so bad, that no one can be advised to take it in
a carriage. Nunnery may be reached from Corby by making a circuit and
crossing the Eden at Armathwaite bridge. A portion of this road,
however, is bad enough.

As much the greatest number of Lake Tourists begin by passing from
Kendal to Bowness, upon Windermere, our notices shall commence with that
Lake. Bowness is situated upon its eastern side, and at equal distance
from each extremity of the Lake of

WINDERMERE.

The lower part of this Lake is rarely visited, but has many interesting
points of view, especially at Storr's Hall and at Fellfoot, where the
Coniston Mountains peer nobly over the western barrier, which
elsewhere, along the whole Lake, is comparatively tame. To one also who
has ascended the hill from Grathwaite on the western side, the
Promontory called Rawlinson's Nab, Storr's Hall, and the Troutbeck
Mountains, about sun-set, make a splendid landscape. The view from the
Pleasure-house of the Station near the Ferry has suffered much from
Larch plantations; this mischief, however, is gradually disappearing,
and the Larches, under the management of the proprietor, Mr. Curwen, are
giving way to the native wood. Windermere ought to be seen both from its
shores and from its surface. None of the other Lakes unfold so many
fresh beauties to him who sails upon them. This is owing to its greater
size, to the islands, and to its having _two_ vales at the head, with
their accompanying mountains of nearly equal dignity. Nor can the
grandeur of these two terminations be seen at once from any point,
except from the bosom of the Lake. The Islands may be explored at any
time of the day; but one bright unruffled evening, must, if possible, be
set apart for the splendour, the stillness, and solemnity of a three
hours' voyage upon the higher division of the Lake, not omitting,
towards the end of the excursion, to quit the expanse of water, and peep
into the close and calm River at the head; which, in its quiet
character, at such a time, appears rather like an overflow of the
peaceful Lake itself, than to have any more immediate connection with
the rough mountains whence it has descended, or the turbulent torrents
by which it is supplied. Many persons content themselves with what they
see of Windermere during their progress in a boat from Bowness to the
head of the Lake, walking thence to Ambleside. But the whole road from
Bowness is rich in diversity of pleasing or grand scenery; there is
scarcely a field on the road side, which, if entered, would not give to
the landscape some additional charm. Low-wood Inn, a mile from the head
of Windermere, is a most pleasant halting-place; no inn in the whole
district is so agreeably situated for water views and excursions; and
the fields above it, and the lane that leads to Troutbeck, present
beautiful views towards each extremity of the Lake. From this place, and
from

                    AMBLESIDE,

Rides may be taken in numerous directions, and the interesting walks
are inexhaustible[47]; a few out of the main road may be
particularized;--the lane that leads from Ambleside to Skelgill; the
ride, or walk by Rothay Bridge, and up the stream under Loughrigg Fell,
continued on the western side of Rydal Lake, and along the fell to the
foot of Grasmere Lake, and thence round by the church of Grasmere; or,
turning round Loughrigg Fell by Loughrigg Tarn and the River Brathay,
back to Ambleside. From Ambleside is another charming excursion by
Clappersgate, where cross the Brathay, and proceed with the river on the
right to the hamlet of Skelwith-fold; when the houses are passed, turn,
before you descend the hill, through a gate on the right, and from a
rocky point is a fine view of the Brathay River, Langdale Pikes, &c.;
then proceed to Colwith-force, and up Little Langdale to Blea Tarn. The
scene in which this small piece of water lies, suggested to the Author
the following description, (given in his Poem of the 'Excursion')
supposing the spectator to look down upon it, not from the road, but
from one of its elevated sides.

              'Behold!
    Beneath our feet, a little lowly Vale,
    A lowly Vale, and yet uplifted high
    Among the mountains; even as if the spot
    Had been, from eldest time by wish of theirs,
    So placed, to be shut out from all the world!
    Urn-like it was in shape, deep as an Urn;
    With rocks encompassed, save that to the South
    Was one small opening, where a heath-clad ridge
    Supplied a boundary less abrupt and close;
    A quiet treeless nook,[48] with two green fields,
    A liquid pool that glittered in the sun,
    And one bare Dwelling; one Abode, no more!
    It seemed the home of poverty and toil,
    Though not of want: the little fields, made green
    By husbandry of many thrifty years,
    Paid cheerful tribute to the moorland House.
    --There crows the Cock, single in his domain:
    The small birds find in Spring no thicket there
    To shroud them; only from the neighbouring Vales
    The Cuckoo, straggling up to the hill tops,
    Shouteth faint tidings of some gladder place.'

[47] Mr. Green's Guide to the Lakes, in two vols., contains a complete
Magazine of minute and accurate information of this kind, with the names
of mountains, streams, &c.

[48] No longer strictly applicable, on account of recent plantations.

From this little Vale return towards Ambleside by Great Langdale,
stopping, if there be time, to see Dungeon-ghyll waterfall.

The Lake of

CONISTON

May be conveniently visited from Ambleside, but is seen to most
advantage by entering the country over the Sands from Lancaster. The
Stranger, from the moment he sets his foot on those Sands, seems to
leave the turmoil and traffic of the world behind him; and, crossing the
majestic plain whence the sea has retired, he beholds, rising apparently
from its base, the cluster of mountains among which he is going to
wander, and towards whose recesses, by the Vale of Coniston, he is
gradually and peacefully led. From the Inn at the head of Coniston Lake,
a leisurely Traveller might have much pleasure in looking into Yewdale
and Tilberthwaite, returning to his Inn from the head of Yewdale by a
mountain track which has the farm of Tarn Hows, a little on the right:
by this road is seen much the best view of Coniston Lake from the south.
At the head of Coniston Water there is an agreeable Inn, from which an
enterprising Tourist might go to the Vale of the Duddon, over Walna
Scar, down to Seathwaite, Newfield, and to the rocks where the river
issues from a narrow pass into the broad Vale. The Stream is very
interesting for the space of a mile above this point, and below, by
Ulpha Kirk, till it enters the Sands, where it is overlooked by the
solitary Mountain Black Comb, the summit of which, as that experienced
surveyor, Colonel Mudge, declared, commands a more extensive view than
any point in Britain. Ireland he saw more than once, but not when the
sun was above the horizon.

    Close by the Sea, lone sentinel,
      Black-Comb his forward station keeps;
    He breaks the sea's tumultuous swell,--
      And ponders o'er the level deeps.

    He listens to the bugle horn,
      Where Eskdale's lovely valley bends;
    Eyes Walney's early fields of corn;
      Sea-birds to Holker's woods he sends.

    Beneath his feet the sunk ship rests,
      In Duddon Sands, its masts all bare:

       *       *       *       *       *

_The Minstrels of Windermere_, by Chas. Farish, B.D.

The Tourist may either return to the Inn at Coniston by Broughton, or,
by turning to the left before he comes to that town, or, which would be
much better, he may cross from

ULPHA KIRK

Over Birker moor, to Birker-force, at the head of the finest ravine in
the country; and thence up the Vale of the Esk, by Hardknot and Wrynose,
back to Ambleside. Near the road, in ascending from Eskdale, are
conspicuous remains of a Roman fortress. Details of the Duddon and
Donnerdale are given in the Author's series of Sonnets upon the Duddon
and in the accompanying Notes. In addition to its two Vales at its head,
Windermere communicates with two lateral Vallies; that of Troutbeck,
distinguished by the mountains at its head--by picturesque remains of
cottage architecture; and, towards the lower part, by bold foregrounds
formed by the steep and winding banks of the river. This Vale, as before
mentioned, may be most conveniently seen from Low Wood. The other
lateral Valley, that of Hawkshead, is visited to most advantage, and
most conveniently, from Bowness; crossing the Lake by the Ferry--then
pass the two villages of Sawrey, and on quitting the latter, you have a
fine view of the Lake of Esthwaite, and the cone of one of the Langdale
Pikes in the distance.

Before you leave Ambleside give three minutes to looking at a passage of
the brook which runs through the town; it is to be seen from a garden on
the right bank of the stream, a few steps above the bridge--the garden
at present is rented by Mrs. Airey.--Stockgill-force, upon the same
stream, will have been mentioned to you as one of the sights of the
neighbourhood. And by a Tourist halting a few days in Ambleside, the
_Nook_ also might be visited; a spot where there is a bridge over
Scandale-beck, which makes a pretty subject for the pencil. Lastly, for
residents of a week or so at Ambleside, there are delightful rambles
over every part of Loughrigg Fell and among the enclosures on its sides;
particularly about Loughrigg Tarn, and on its eastern side about Fox How
and the properties adjoining to the north-wards.

ROAD FROM AMBLESIDE TO KESWICK.

The Waterfalls of Rydal are pointed out to every one. But it ought to be
observed here, that Rydal-mere is no where seen to advantage from the
_main road_. Fine views of it may be had from Rydal Park; but these
grounds, as well as those of Rydal Mount and Ivy Cottage, from which
also it is viewed to advantage, are private. A foot road passing behind
Rydal Mount and under Nab Scar to Grasmere, is very favourable to views
of the Lake and the Vale, looking back towards Ambleside. The horse road
also, along the western side of the Lake, under Loughrigg fell, as
before mentioned, does justice to the beauties of this small mere, of
which the Traveller who keeps the high road is not at all aware.

GRASMERE.

There are two small Inns in the Vale of Grasmere, one near the Church,
from which it may be conveniently explored in every direction, and a
mountain walk taken up Easedale to Easedale Tarn, one of the finest
tarns in the country, thence to Stickle Tarn, and to the top of Langdale
Pikes. See also the Vale of Grasmere from Butterlip How. A boat is kept
by the innkeeper, and this circular Vale, in the solemnity of a fine
evening, will make, from the bosom of the Lake, an impression that will
be scarcely ever effaced.

The direct road from Grasmere to Keswick does not (as has been observed
of Rydal Mere) shew to advantage Thirlmere, or Wythburn Lake, with its
surrounding mountains. By a Traveller proceeding at leisure, a deviation
ought to be made from the main road, when he has advanced a little
beyond the sixth mile-stone short of Keswick, from which point there is
a noble view of the Vale of Legberthwaite, with Blencathra (commonly
called Saddle-back) in front. Having previously enquired, at the Inn
near Wythburn Chapel, the best way from this mile-stone to the bridge
that divides the Lake, he must cross it, and proceed with the Lake on
the right, to the hamlet a little beyond its termination, and rejoin the
main road upon Shoulthwaite Moss, about four miles from Keswick; or, if
on foot, the Tourist may follow the stream that issues from Thirlmere
down the romantic Vale of St. John's, and so (enquiring the way at some
cottage) to Keswick, by a circuit of little more than a mile. A more
interesting tract of country is scarcely any where to be seen, than the
road between Ambleside and Keswick, with the deviations that have been
pointed out. Helvellyn may be conveniently ascended from the Inn at
Wythburn.

THE VALE OF KESWICK.

This Vale stretches, without winding, nearly North and South, from the
head of Derwent Water to the foot of Bassenthwaite Lake. It communicates
with Borrowdale on the South; with the river Greta, and Thirlmere, on
the East, with which the Traveller has become acquainted on his way from
Ambleside; and with the Vale of Newlands on the West--which last Vale
he may pass through, in going to, or returning from, Buttermere. The
best views of Keswick Lake are from Crow Park; Frier's Crag; the
Stable-field, close by; the Vicarage, and from various points in taking
the circuit of the Lake. More distant views, and perhaps full as
interesting, are from the side of Latrigg, from Ormathwaite, and
Applethwaite; and thence along the road at the foot of Skiddaw towards
Bassenthwaite, for about a quarter of a mile. There are fine bird's eye
views from the Castle-hill; from Ashness, on the road to Watenlath, and
by following the Watenlath stream downwards to the Cataract of Lodore.
This Lake also, if the weather be fine, ought to be circumnavigated.
There are good views along the western side of Bassenthwaite Lake, and
from Armathwaite at its foot; but the eastern side from the high road
has little to recommend it. The Traveller from Carlisle, approaching by
way of Ireby, has, from the old road on the top of Bassenthwaite-hawse,
much the most striking view of the Plain and Lake of Bassenthwaite,
flanked by Skiddaw, and terminated by Wallow-crag on the south-east of
Derwent Lake; the same point commands an extensive view of Solway Frith
and the Scotch Mountains. They who take the circuit of Derwent Lake, may
at the same time include BORROWDALE, going as far as Bowder-stone, or
Rosthwaite. Borrowdale is also conveniently seen on the way to Wastdale
over Sty-head; or, to Buttermere, by Seatoller and Honister Crag; or,
going over the Stake, through Langdale, to Ambleside. Buttermere may be
visited by a shorter way through Newlands, but though the descent upon
the Vale of Buttermere, by this approach, is very striking, as it also
is to one entering by the head of the Vale, under Honister Crag, yet,
after all, the best entrance from Keswick is from the lower part of the
Vale, having gone over Whinlater to Scale Hill, where there is a roomy
Inn, with very good accommodation. The Mountains of the Vale of

BUTTERMERE AND CRUMMOCK

are no where so impressive as from the bosom of Crummock Water.
Scale-force, near it, is a fine chasm, with a lofty, though but slender,
Fall of water.

From Scale Hill a pleasant walk may be taken to an eminence in Mr.
Marshall's woods, and another by crossing the bridge at the foot of the
hill, upon which the Inn stands, and turning to the right, after the
opposite hill has been ascended a little way, then follow the road for
half a mile or so that leads towards Lorton, looking back upon Crummock
Water, &c., between the openings of the fences. Turn back and make your
way to

LOWES-WATER.

But this small Lake is only approached to advantage from the other end;
therefore any Traveller going by this road to Wastdale, must look back
upon it. This road to Wastdale, after passing the village of Lamplugh
Cross, presents suddenly a fine view of the Lake of Ennerdale, with its
Mountains; and, six or seven miles beyond, leads down upon Calder Abbey.
Little of this ruin is left, but that little is well worthy of notice.
At Calder Bridge are two comfortable Inns, and, a few miles beyond,
accommodations may be had at the Strands, at the foot of Wastdale. Into

WASTDALE

are three horse-roads, viz. over the Stye, from Borrowdale; a short cut
from Eskdale by Burnmore Tarn, which road descends upon the head of the
Lake; and the principal entrance from the open country by the Strands at
its foot. This last is much the best approach. Wastdale is well worth
the notice of the Traveller who is not afraid of fatigue; no part of the
country is more distinguished by sublimity. Wast-water may also be
visited from Ambleside; by going up Langdale, over Hardknot and
Wrynose--down Eskdale and by Irton Hall to the Strands; but this road
can only be taken on foot, or on horseback, or in a cart.

We will conclude with

ULLSWATER,

as being, perhaps, upon the whole, the happiest combination of beauty
and grandeur, which any of the Lakes affords. It lies not more than ten
miles from Ambleside, and the Pass of Kirkstone and the descent from it
are very impressive; but, notwithstanding, this Vale, like the others,
loses much of its effect by being entered from the head: so that it is
better to go from Keswick through Matterdale, and descend upon Gowbarrow
Park; you are thus brought at once upon a magnificent view of the two
higher reaches of the Lake. Ara-force thunders down the Ghyll on the
left, at a small distance from the road. If Ullswater be approached from
Penrith, a mile and a half brings you to the winding vale of Eamont, and
the prospects increase in interest till you reach Patterdale; but the
first four miles along Ullswater by this road are comparatively tame;
and in order to see the lower part of the Lake to advantage, it is
necessary to go round by Pooley Bridge, and to ride at least three miles
along the Westmoreland side of the water, towards Martindale. The views,
especially if you ascend from the road into the fields, are magnificent;
yet this is only mentioned that the transient Visitant may know what
exists; for it would be inconvenient to go in search of them. They who
take this course of three or four miles _on foot_, should have a boat in
readiness at the end of the walk, to carry them across to the Cumberland
side of the Lake, near Old Church, thence to pursue the road upwards to
Patterdale. The Church-yard Yew-tree still survives at Old Church, but
there are no remains of a Place of Worship, a New Chapel having been
erected in a more central situation, which Chapel was consecrated by the
then Bishop of Carlisle, when on his way to crown Queen Elizabeth, he
being the only Prelate who would undertake the office. It may be here
mentioned that Bassenthwaite Chapel yet stands in a bay as sequestered
as the Site of Old Church; such situations having been chosen in
disturbed times to elude marauders.

The Trunk, or Body of the Vale of Ullswater need not be further noticed,
as its beauties show themselves: but the curious Traveller may wish to
know something of its tributary Streams.

At Dalemain, about three miles from Penrith, a Stream is crossed called
the Dacre, or Dacor, which name it bore as early as the time of the
Venerable Bede. This stream does not enter the Lake, but joins the
Eamont a mile below. It rises in the moorish Country about Penruddock,
flows down a soft sequestered Valley, passing by the ancient mansions
of Hutton John and Dacre Castle. The former is pleasantly situated,
though of a character somewhat gloomy and monastic, and from some of the
fields near Dalemain, Dacre Castle, backed by the jagged summit of
Saddle-back, with the Valley and Stream in front, forms a grand picture.
There is no other stream that conducts to any glen or valley worthy of
being mentioned, till we reach that which leads up to Ara-force, and
thence into Matterdale, before spoken of. Matterdale, though a wild and
interesting spot, has no peculiar features that would make it worth the
Stranger's while to go in search of them; but, in Gowbarrow Park, the
lover of Nature might linger for hours. Here is a powerful Brook, which
dashes among rocks through a deep glen, hung on every side with a rich
and happy intermixture of native wood; here are beds of luxuriant fern,
aged hawthorns, and hollies decked with honeysuckles; and fallow-deer
glancing and bounding over the lawns and through the thickets. These are
the attractions of the retired views, or constitute a foreground for
ever-varying pictures of the majestic Lake, forced to take a winding
course by bold promontories, and environed by mountains of sublime form,
towering above each other. At the outlet of Gowbarrow Park, we reach a
third stream, which flows through a little recess called Glencoin, where
lurks a single house, yet visible from the road. Let the Artist or
leisurely Traveller turn aside to it, for the buildings and objects
around them are romantic and picturesque. Having passed under the steeps
of Styebarrow Crag, and the remains of its native woods, at Glenridding
Bridge, a fourth Stream is crossed.

The opening on the side of Ullswater Vale, down which this Stream flows,
is adorned with fertile fields, cottages, and natural groves, that
agreeably unite with the transverse views of the Lake; and the Stream,
if followed up after the enclosures are left behind, will lead along
bold water-breaks and waterfalls to a silent Tarn in the recesses of
Helvellyn. This desolate spot was formerly haunted by eagles, that built
in the precipice which forms its western barrier. These birds used to
wheel and hover round the head of the solitary angler. It also derives a
melancholy interest from the fate of a young man, a stranger, who
perished some years ago, by falling down the rocks in his attempt to
cross over to Grasmere. His remains were discovered by means of a
faithful dog that had lingered here for the space of three months,
self-supported, and probably retaining to the last an attachment to the
skeleton of its master. But to return to the road in the main Vale of
Ullswater.--At the head of the Lake (being now in Patterdale) we cross
a fifth Stream, Grisdale Beck: this would conduct through a woody steep,
where may be seen some unusually large ancient hollies, up to the level
area of the Valley of Grisdale; hence there is a path for
foot-travellers, and along which a horse may be led to Grasmere. A
sublime combination of mountain forms appears in front while ascending
the bed of this valley, and the impression increases till the path leads
almost immediately under the projecting masses of Helvellyn. Having
retraced the banks of the Stream to Patterdale, and pursued the road up
the main Dale, the next considerable stream would, if ascended in the
same manner, conduct to Deep-dale, the character of which Valley may be
conjectured from its name. It is terminated by a cove, a craggy and
gloomy abyss, with precipitous sides; a faithful receptacle of the snows
that are driven into it, by the west wind, from the summit of Fairfield.
Lastly, having gone along the western side of Brotherswater and passed
Hartsop Hall, a Stream soon after issues from a cove richly decorated
with native wood. This spot is, I believe, never explored by Travellers;
but, from these sylvan and rocky recesses, whoever looks back on the
gleaming surface of Brotherswater, or forward to the precipitous sides
and lofty ridges of Dove Crag, &c., will be equally pleased with the
beauty, the grandeur, and the wildness of the scenery.

Seven Glens or Vallies have been noticed, which branch off from the
Cumberland side of the Vale. The opposite side has only two Streams of
any importance, one of which would lead up from the point where it
crosses the Kirkstone-road, near the foot of Brotherswater, to the
decaying hamlet of Hartsop, remarkable for its cottage architecture, and
thence to Hayswater, much frequented by anglers. The other, coming down
Martindale, enters Ullswater at Sandwyke, opposite to Gowbarrow Park. No
persons but such as come to Patterdale, merely to pass through it,
should fail to walk as far as Blowick, the only enclosed land which on
this side borders the higher part of the Lake. The axe has here
indiscriminately levelled a rich wood of birches and oaks, that divided
this favoured spot into a hundred pictures. It has yet its land-locked
bays, and rocky promontories; but those beautiful woods are gone, which
_perfected_ its seclusion; and scenes, that might formerly have been
compared to an inexhaustible volume, are now spread before the eye in a
single sheet,--magnificent indeed, but seemingly perused in a moment!
From Blowick a narrow track conducts along the craggy side of
Place-fell, richly adorned with juniper, and sprinkled over with
birches, to the village of Sandwyke, a few straggling houses, that with
the small estates attached to them, occupy an opening opposite to
Lyulph's Tower and Gowbarrow Park. In Martindale,[49] the road loses
sight of the Lake, and leads over a steep hill, bringing you again into
view of Ullswater. Its lowest reach, four miles in length, is before
you; and the view terminated by the long ridge of Cross Fell in the
distance. Immediately under the eye is a deep-indented bay, with a plot
of fertile land, traversed by a small brook, and rendered cheerful by
two or three substantial houses of a more ornamented and showy
appearance than is usual in those wild spots.

From Pooley Bridge, at the foot of the Lake, Haweswater may be
conveniently visited. Haweswater is a lesser Ullswater, with this
advantage, that it remains undefiled by the intrusion of bad taste.

Lowther Castle is about four miles from Pooley Bridge, and, if during
this Tour the Stranger has complained, as he will have had reason to do,
of a want of majestic trees, he may be abundantly recompensed for his
loss in the far-spreading woods which surround that mansion. Visitants,
for the most part, see little of the beauty of these magnificent
grounds, being content with the view from the Terrace; but the whole
course of the Lowther, from Askham to the bridge under Brougham Hall,
presents almost at every step some new feature of river, woodland, and
rocky landscape. A portion of this tract has, from its beauty, acquired
the name of the Elysian Fields;--but the course of the stream can only
be followed by the pedestrian.

NOTE.--_Vide_ p. 227.--About 200 yards beyond the last house on the
Keswick side of Rydal village the road is cut through a low wooded rock,
called Thrang Crag. The top of it, which is only a few steps on the
south side, affords the best view of the Vale which is to be had by a
Traveller who confines himself to the public road.

[49] See page 308.




DESCRIPTION OF THE SCENERY OF THE LAKES.

       *       *       *       *       *

SECTION FIRST.

VIEW OF THE COUNTRY AS FORMED BY NATURE.


At Lucerne, in Switzerland, is shewn a Model of the Alpine country which
encompasses the Lake of the four Cantons. The Spectator ascends a little
platform, and sees mountains, lakes, glaciers, rivers, woods,
waterfalls, and vallies, with their cottages, and every other object
contained in them, lying at his feet; all things being represented in
their appropriate colours. It may be easily conceived that this
exhibition affords an exquisite delight to the imagination, tempting it
to wander at will from valley to valley, from mountain to mountain,
through the deepest recesses of the Alps. But it supplies also a more
substantial pleasure: for the sublime and beautiful region, with all its
hidden treasures, and their bearings and relations to each other, is
thereby comprehended and understood at once.

Something of this kind, without touching upon minute details and
individualities which would only confuse and embarrass, will here be
attempted, in respect to the Lakes in the north of England, and the
vales and mountains enclosing and surrounding them. The delineation, if
tolerably executed, will, in some instances, communicate to the
traveller, who has already seen the objects, new information; and will
assist in giving to his recollections a more orderly arrangement than
his own opportunities of observing may have permitted him to make; while
it will be still more useful to the future traveller, by directing his
attention at once to distinctions in things which, without such previous
aid, a length of time only could enable him to discover. It is hoped,
also, that this Essay may become generally serviceable, by leading to
habits of more exact and considerate observation than, as far as the
writer knows, have hitherto been applied to local scenery.

To begin, then, with the main outlines of the country;--I know not how
to give the reader a distinct image of these more readily, than by
requesting him to place himself with me, in imagination, upon some given
point; let it be the top of either of the mountains, Great Gavel, or
Scawfell; or, rather, let us suppose our station to be a cloud hanging
midway between those two mountains, at not more than half a mile's
distance from the summit of each, and not many yards above their highest
elevation; we shall then see stretched at our feet a number of vallies,
not fewer than eight, diverging from the point, on which we are supposed
to stand, like spokes from the nave of a wheel. First, we note, lying to
the south-east, the vale of Langdale,[50] which will conduct the eye to
the long lake of Winandermere, stretched nearly to the sea; or rather to
the sands of the vast bay of Morcamb, serving here for the rim of this
imaginary wheel;--let us trace it in a direction from the south-east
towards the south, and we shall next fix our eyes upon the vale of
Coniston, running up likewise from the sea, but not (as all the other
vallies do) to the nave of the wheel, and therefore it may be not
inaptly represented as a broken spoke sticking in the rim. Looking forth
again, with an inclination towards the west, we see immediately at our
feet the vale of Duddon, in which is no lake, but a copious stream,
winding among fields, rocks, and mountains, and terminating its course
in the sands of Duddon. The fourth vale, next to be observed, viz. that
of the Esk, is of the same general character as the last, yet
beautifully discriminated from it by peculiar features. Its stream
passes under the woody steep upon which stands Muncaster Castle, the
ancient seat of the Penningtons, and after forming a short and narrow
aestuary enters the sea below the small town of Ravenglass. Next, almost
due west, look down into, and along the deep valley of Wastdale, with
its little chapel and half a dozen neat dwellings scattered upon a plain
of meadow and corn-ground intersected with stone walls apparently
innumerable, like a large piece of lawless patch-work, or an array of
mathematical figures, such as in the ancient schools of geometry might
have been sportively and fantastically traced out upon sand. Beyond this
little fertile plain lies, within a bed of steep mountains, the long,
narrow, stern, and desolate lake of Wastdale; and, beyond this, a dusky
tract of level ground conducts the eye to the Irish Sea. The stream
that issues from Wast-water is named the Irt, and falls into the
aestuary of the river Esk. Next comes in view Ennerdale, with its lake
of bold and somewhat savage shores. Its stream, the Ehen or Enna,
flowing through a soft and fertile country, passes the town of Egremont,
and the ruins of the castle,--then, seeming, like the other rivers, to
break through the barrier of sand thrown up by the winds on this
tempestuous coast, enters the Irish Sea. The vale of Buttermere, with
the lake and village of that name, and Crummock-water, beyond, next
present themselves. We will follow the main stream, the Coker, through
the fertile and beautiful vale of Lorton, till it is lost in the
Derwent, below the noble ruins of Cockermouth Castle. Lastly,
Borrowdale, of which the vale of Keswick is only a continuation,
stretching due north, brings us to a point nearly opposite to the vale
of Winandermere with which we began. From this it will appear, that the
image of a wheel, thus far exact, is little more than one half complete;
but the deficiency on the eastern side may be supplied by the vales of
Wytheburn, Ulswater, Hawswater, and the vale of Grasmere and Rydal; none
of these, however, run up to the central point between Great Gavel and
Scawfell. From this, hitherto our central point, take a flight of not
more than four or five miles eastward to the ridge of Helvellyn, and you
will look down upon Wytheburn and St. John's Vale, which are a branch of
the vale of Keswick; upon Ulswater, stretching due east:--and not far
beyond to the south-east (though from this point not visible) lie the
vale and lake of Hawswater; and lastly, the vale of Grasmere, Rydal, and
Ambleside, brings you back to Winandermere, thus completing, though on
the eastern side in a somewhat irregular manner, the representative
figure of the wheel.

[50] Anciently spelt Langden, and so called by the old inhabitants to
this day--_dean_, from which the latter part of the word is derived,
being in many parts of England a name for a valley.

Such, concisely given, is the general topographical view of the country
of the Lakes in the north of England; and it may be observed, that, from
the circumference to the centre, that is, from the sea or plain country
to the mountain stations specified, there is--in the several ridges that
enclose these vales, and divide them from each other, I mean in the
forms and surfaces, first of the swelling grounds, next of the hills and
rocks, and lastly of the mountains--an ascent of almost regular
gradation, from elegance and richness, to their highest point of
grandeur and sublimity. It follows therefore from this, first, that
these rocks, hills, and mountains, must present themselves to view in
stages rising above each other, the mountains clustering together
towards the central point; and next, that an observer familiar with the
several vales, must, from their various position in relation to the sun,
have had before his eyes every possible embellishment of beauty,
dignity, and splendour, which light and shadow can bestow upon objects
so diversified. For example, in the vale of Winandermere, if the
spectator looks for gentle and lovely scenes, his eye is turned towards
the south; if for the grand, towards the north: in the vale of Keswick,
which (as hath been said) lies almost due north of this, it is directly
the reverse. Hence, when the sun is setting in summer far to the
north-west, it is seen, by the spectator from the shores or breast of
Winandermere, resting among the summits of the loftiest mountains, some
of which will perhaps be half or wholly hidden by clouds, or by the
blaze of light which the orb diffuses around it; and the surface of the
lake will reflect before the eye correspondent colours through every
variety of beauty, and through all degrees of splendour. In the vale of
Keswick, at the same period, the sun sets over the humbler regions of
the landscape, and showers down upon _them_ the radiance which at once
veils and glorifies,--sending forth, meanwhile, broad streams of rosy,
crimson, purple, or golden light, towards the grand mountains in the
south and south-east, which, thus illuminated, with all their
projections and cavities, and with an intermixture of solemn shadows,
are seen distinctly through a cool and clear atmosphere. Of course,
there is as marked a difference between the _noontide_ appearance of
these two opposite vales. The bedimming haze that overspreads the south,
and the clear atmosphere and determined shadows of the clouds in the
north, at the same time of the day, are each seen in these several
vales, with a contrast as striking. The reader will easily conceive in
what degree the intermediate vales partake of a kindred variety.

I do not indeed know any tract of country in which, within so narrow a
compass, may be found an equal variety in the influences of light and
shadow upon the sublime or beautiful features of landscape; and it is
owing to the combined circumstances to which the reader's attention has
been directed. From a point between Great Gavel and Scawfell, a
shepherd would not require more than an hour to descend into any one of
eight of the principal vales by which he would be surrounded; and all
the others lie (with the exception of Hawswater) at but a small
distance. Yet, though clustered together, every valley has its distinct
and separate character: in some instances, as if they had been formed in
studied contrast to each other, and in others with the united pleasing
differences and resemblances of a sisterly rivalship. This concentration
of interest gives to the country a decided superiority over the most
attractive districts of Scotland and Wales, especially for the
pedestrian traveller. In Scotland and Wales are found, undoubtedly,
individual scenes, which, in their several kinds, cannot be excelled.
But, in Scotland, particularly, what long tracts of desolate country
intervene! so that the traveller, when he reaches a spot deservedly of
great celebrity, would find it difficult to determine how much of his
pleasure is owing to excellence inherent in the landscape itself; and
how much to an instantaneous recovery from an oppression left upon his
spirits by the barrenness and desolation through which he has passed.

But to proceed with our survey;--and, first, of the MOUNTAINS. Their
_forms_ are endlessly diversified, sweeping easily or boldly in simple
majesty, abrupt and precipitous, or soft and elegant. In magnitude and
grandeur they are individually inferior to the most celebrated of those
in some other parts of this island; but, in the combinations which they
make, towering above each other, or lifting themselves in ridges like
the waves of a tumultuous sea, and in the beauty and variety of their
surfaces and colours, they are surpassed by none.

The general _surface_ of the mountains is turf, rendered rich and green
by the moisture of the climate. Sometimes the turf, as in the
neighbourhood of Newlands, is little broken, the whole covering being
soft and downy pasturage. In other places rocks predominate; the soil is
laid bare by torrents and burstings of water from the sides of the
mountains in heavy rains; and not unfrequently their perpendicular sides
are seamed by ravines (formed also by rains and torrents) which, meeting
in angular points, entrench and scar the surface with numerous figures
like the letters W. and Y.

In the ridge that divides Eskdale from Wasdale, granite is found; but
the MOUNTAINS are for the most part composed of the stone by
mineralogists termed schist, which, as you approach the plain country,
gives place to limestone and freestone; but schist being the substance
of the mountains, the predominant _colour_ of their _rocky_ parts is
bluish, or hoary grey--the general tint of the lichens with which the
bare stone is encrusted. With this blue or grey colour is frequently
intermixed a red tinge, proceeding from the iron that interveins the
stone, and impregnates the soil. The iron is the principle of
decomposition in these rocks; and hence, when they become pulverized,
the elementary particles crumbling down, overspread in many places the
steep and almost precipitous sides of the mountains with an intermixture
of colours, like the compound hues of a dove's neck. When in the heat of
advancing summer, the fresh green tint of the herbage has somewhat
faded, it is again revived by the appearance of the fern profusely
spread over the same ground: and, upon this plant, more than upon
anything else, do the changes which the seasons make in the colouring of
the mountains depend. About the first week in October, the rich green,
which prevailed through the whole summer, is usually passed away. The
brilliant and various colours of the fern are then in harmony with the
autumnal woods; bright yellow or lemon colour, at the base of the
mountains, melting gradually, through orange, to a dark russet brown
towards the summits, where the plant, being more exposed to the weather,
is in a more advanced state of decay. Neither heath nor furze are
_generally_ found upon the _sides_ of these mountains, though in many
places they are adorned by those plants, so beautiful when in flower. We
may add, that the mountains are of height sufficient to have the surface
towards the summit softened by distance, and to imbibe the finest aërial
hues. In common also with other mountains, their apparent forms and
colours are perpetually changed by the clouds and vapours which float
round them: the effect indeed of mist or haze, in a country of this
character, is like that of magic. I have seen six or seven ridges rising
above each other, all created in a moment by the vapours upon the side
of a mountain, which, in its ordinary appearance, shewed not a
projecting point to furnish even a hint for such an operation.

I will take this opportunity of observing, that they who have studied
the appearances of Nature feel that the superiority, in point of visual
interest, of mountainous over other countries--is more strikingly
displayed in winter than in summer. This, as must be obvious, is partly
owing to the _forms_ of the mountains, which, of course, are not
affected by the seasons; but also, in no small degree, to the greater
variety that exists in their winter than their summer _colouring_. This
variety is such, and so harmoniously preserved, that it leaves little
cause of regret when the splendour of autumn is passed away. The
oak-coppices, upon the sides of the mountains, retain russet leaves; the
birch stands conspicuous with its silver stem and puce-coloured twigs;
the hollies, with green leaves and scarlet berries, have come forth to
view from among the deciduous trees, whose summer foliage had concealed
them; the ivy is now plentifully apparent upon the stems and boughs of
the trees, and upon the steep rocks. In place of the deep summer-green
of the herbage and fern, many rich colours play into each other over the
surface of the mountains; turf (the tints of which are interchangeably
tawny-green, olive, and brown), beds of withered fern, and grey rocks,
being harmoniously blended together. The mosses and lichens are never so
fresh and flourishing as in winter, if it be not a season of frost; and
their minute beauties prodigally adorn the foreground. Wherever we turn,
we find these productions of Nature, to which winter is rather
favourable than unkindly, scattered over the walls, banks of earth,
rocks, and stones, and upon the trunks of trees, with the intermixture
of several species of small fern, now green and fresh; and, to the
observing passenger, their forms and colours are a source of
inexhaustable admiration. Add to this the hoar-frost and snow, with all
the varieties they create, and which volumes would not be sufficient to
describe. I will content myself with one instance of the colouring
produced by snow, which may not be uninteresting to painters. It is
extracted from the memorandum-book of a friend; and for its accuracy I
can speak, having been an eye-witness of the appearance. 'I observed,'
says he, 'the beautiful effect of the drifted snow upon the mountains,
and the perfect _tone_ of colour. From the top of the mountains
downwards a rich olive was produced by the powdery snow and the grass,
which olive was warmed with a little brown, and in this way harmoniously
combined, by insensible gradations, with the white. The drifting took
away the monotony of snow; and the whole vale of Grasmere, seen from
the terrace walk in Easedale, was as varied, perhaps more so, than even
in the pomp of autumn. In the distance was Loughrigg-Fell, the
basin-wall of the lake: this, from the summit downward, was a rich
orange-olive; then the lake of a bright olive-green, nearly the same
tint as the snow-powdered mountain tops and high slopes in Easedale; and
lastly, the church, with its firs, forming the centre of the view. Next
to the church came nine distinguishable hills, six of them with woody
sides turned towards us, all of them oak-copses with their bright red
leaves and snow-powdered twigs; these hills--so variously situated in
relation to each other, and to the view in general, so variously
powdered, some only enough to give the herbage a rich brown tint, one
intensely white and lighting up all the others--were yet so placed, as
in the most inobtrusive manner to harmonise by contrast with a perfect
naked, snowless bleak summit in the far distance.'

Having spoken of the forms, surface, and colour of the mountains, let us
descend into the VALES. Though these have been represented under the
general image of the spokes of a wheel, they are, for the most part,
winding; the windings of many being abrupt and intricate. And, it may be
observed, that, in one circumstance, the general shape of them all has
been determined by that primitive conformation through which so many
became receptacles of lakes. For they are not formed, as are most of the
celebrated Welsh vallies, by an approximation of the sloping bases of
the opposite mountains towards each other, leaving little more between
than a channel for the passage of a hasty river; but the bottom of these
vallies is mostly a spacious and gently declining area, apparently level
as the floor of a temple, or the surface of a lake, and broken in many
cases, by rocks and hills, which rise up like islands from the plain. In
such of the vallies as make many windings, these level areas open upon
the traveller in succession, divided from each other sometimes by a
mutual approximation of the hills, leaving only passage for a river,
sometimes by correspondent windings, without such approximation; and
sometimes by a bold advance of one mountain towards that which is
opposite it. It may here be observed with propriety that the several
rocks and hills, which have been described as rising up like islands
from the level area of the vale, have regulated the choice of the
inhabitants in the situation of their dwellings. Where none of these
are found, and the inclination of the ground is not sufficiently rapid
easily to carry off the waters, (as in the higher part of Langdale, for
instance,) the houses are not sprinkled over the middle of the vales,
but confined to their sides, being placed merely so far up the mountain
as to be protected from the floods. But where these rocks and hills have
been scattered over the plain of the vale, (as in Grasmere, Donnerdale,
Eskdale, &c.) the beauty which they give to the scene is much heightened
by a single cottage, or cluster of cottages, that will be almost always
found under them, or upon their sides; dryness and shelter having
tempted the Dalesmen to fix their habitations there.

I shall now speak of the LAKES of this country. The form of the lake is
most perfect when, like Derwent-water, and some of the smaller lakes, it
least resembles that of a river;--I mean, when being looked at from
any given point where the whole may be seen at once, the width of it
bears such proportion to the length, that, however the outline may be
diversified by far-receding bays, it never assumes the shape of a river,
and is contemplated with that placid and quiet feeling which belongs
peculiarly to the lake--as a body of still water under the influence
of no current; reflecting therefore the clouds, the light, and all the
imagery of the sky and surrounding hills; expressing also and making
visible the changes of the atmosphere, and motions of the lightest
breeze, and subject to agitation only from the winds--

            --The visible scene
    Would enter unawares into his mind
    With all its solemn imagery, its rocks,
    Its woods, and that uncertain heaven received
    Into the bosom of the _steady_ lake!

It must be noticed, as a favourable characteristic of the lakes of this
country, that, though several of the largest, such as Winandermere,
Ulswater, Hawswater, do, when the whole length of them is commanded from
an elevated point, loose somewhat of the peculiar form of the lake, and
assume the resemblance of a magnificent river; yet, as their shape is
winding, (particularly that of Ulswater and Hawswater) when the view of
the whole is obstructed by those barriers which determine the windings,
and the spectator is confined to one reach, the appropriate feeling is
revived; and one lake may thus in succession present to the eye the
essential characteristic of many. But, though the forms of the large
lakes have this advantage, it is nevertheless favourable to the beauty
of the country that the largest of them are comparatively small; and
that the same vale generally furnishes a succession of lakes, instead of
being filled with one. The vales in North Wales, as hath been observed,
are not formed for the reception of lakes; those of Switzerland,
Scotland, and this part of the North of England, _are_ so formed; but,
in Switzerland and Scotland, the proportion of diffused water is often
too great, as at the lake of Geneva for instance, and in most of the
Scotch lakes. No doubt it sounds magnificent and flatters the
imagination, to hear at a distance of expanses of water so many leagues
in length and miles in width; and such ample room may be delightful to
the fresh-water sailor, scudding with a lively breeze amid the
rapidly-shifting scenery. But, who ever travelled along the banks of
Loch-Lomond, variegated as the lower part is by islands, without feeling
that a speedier termination of the long vista of blank water would be
acceptable; and without wishing for an interposition of green meadows,
trees, and cottages, and a sparkling stream to run by his side? In fact,
a notion, of grandeur, as connected with magnitude, has seduced persons
of taste into a general mistake upon this subject. It is much more
desirable, for the purposes of pleasure, that lakes should be numerous,
and small or middle-sized, than large, not only for communication by
walks and rides, but for variety, and for recurrence of similar
appearances. To illustrate this by one instance:--how pleasing is it
to have a ready and frequent opportunity of watching, at the outlet of a
lake, the stream pushing its way among the rocks in lively contrast with
the stillness from which it has escaped; and how amusing to compare its
noisy and turbulent motions with the gentle playfulness of the breezes,
that may be starting up or wandering here and there over the
faintly-rippled surface of the broad water! I may add, as a general
remark, that, in lakes of great width, the shores cannot be distinctly
seen at the same time, and therefore contribute little to mutual
illustration and ornament; and, if the opposite shores are out of sight
of each other, like those of the American and Asiatic lakes, then
unfortunately the traveller is reminded of a nobler object; he has the
blankness of a sea-prospect without the grandeur and accompanying sense
of power.

As the comparatively small size of the lakes in the North of England is
favourable to the production of variegated landscape, their
_boundary-line_ also is for the most part gracefully or boldly indented.
That uniformity which prevails in the primitive frame of the lower
grounds among all chains or clusters of mountains where large bodies of
still water are bedded, is broken by the _secondary_ agents of Nature,
ever at work to supply the deficiences of the mould in which things were
originally cast. Using the word _deficiences_, I do not speak with
reference to those stronger emotions which a region of mountains is
peculiarly fitted to excite. The bases of those huge barriers may run
for a long space in straight lines, and these parallel to each other;
the opposite sides of a profound vale may ascend as exact counterparts,
or in mutual reflection, like the billows of a troubled sea; and the
impression be, from its very simplicity, more awful and sublime.
Sublimity is the result of Nature's first great dealings with the
superficies of the Earth; but the general tendency of her subsequent
operations is towards the production of beauty; by a multiplicity of
symmetrical parts uniting in a consistent whole. This is everywhere
exemplified along the margins of these lakes. Masses of rock, that have
been precipitated from the heights into the area of waters, lie in some
places like stranded ships; or have acquired the compact structure of
jutting piers; or project in little peninsulas crested with native wood.
The smallest rivulet--one whose silent influx is scarcely noticeable
in a season of dry weather--so faint is the dimple made by it on the
surface of the smooth lake--will be found to have been not useless in
shaping, by its deposits of gravel and soil in time of flood, a curve
that would not otherwise have existed. But the more powerful brooks,
encroaching upon the level of the lake, have, in course of time, given
birth to ample promontories of sweeping outline that contrast boldly
with the longitudinal base of the steeps on the opposite shore; while
their flat or gently-sloping-surfaces never fail to introduce, into the
midst of desolation and barrenness, the elements of fertility, even
where the habitations of men may not have been raised. These alluvial
promontories, however, threaten, in some places, to bisect the waters
which they have long adorned; and, in course of ages, they will cause
some of the lakes to dwindle into numerous and insignificant pools;
which, in their turn, will finally be filled up. But, checking these
intrusive calculations, let us rather be content with appearances as
they are, and pursue in imagination the meandering shores, whether
rugged steeps, admitting of no cultivation, descend into the water; or
gently-sloping lawns and woods, or flat and fertile meadows, stretch
between the margin of the lake and the mountains. Among minuter
recommendations will be noticed, especially along bays exposed to the
setting-in of strong winds, the curved rim of fine blue gravel, thrown
up in course of time by the waves, half of it perhaps gleaming from
under the water, and the corresponding half of a lighter hue; and in
other parts bordering the lake, groves, if I may so call them, of reeds
and bulrushes; or plots of water-lilies lifting up their large
target-shaped leaves to the breeze, while the white flower is heaving
upon the wave.

To these may naturally be added the birds that enliven the waters.
Wild-ducks in spring-time hatch their young in the islands, and upon
reedy shores;--the sand-piper, flitting along the stony margins, by
its restless note attracts the eye to motions as restless:--upon some
jutting rock, or at the edge of a smooth meadow, the stately heron may
be descried with folded wings, that might seem to have caught their
delicate hue from the blue waters, by the side of which she watches for
her sustenance. In winter, the lakes are sometimes resorted to by wild
swans; and in that season habitually by widgeons, goldings, and other
aquatic fowl of the smaller species. Let me be allowed the aid of verse
to describe the evolutions which these visitants sometimes perform, on a
fine day towards the close of winter.

    Mark how the feather'd tenants of the flood,
    With grace of motion that might scarcely seem
    Inferior to angelical, prolong
    Their curious pastime! shaping in mid air
    (And sometimes with ambitious wing that soars
    High as the level of the mountain tops,)
    A circuit ampler than the lake beneath,
    Their own domain;---but ever, while intent
    On tracing and retracing that large round,
    Their jubilant activity evolves
    Hundreds of curves and circlets, to and fro,
    Upward and downward, progress intricate
    Yet unperplex'd, as if one spirit swayed
    Their indefatigable flight.--'Tis done--
    Ten times, or more, I fancied it had ceased;
    But lo! the vanish'd company again
    Ascending;--they approach--I hear their wings
    Faint, faint, at first, and then an eager sound
    Past in a moment--and as faint again!
    They tempt the sun to sport amid their plumes;
    They tempt the water or the gleaming ice,
    To shew them a fair image;--'tis themselves,
    Their own fair forms, upon the glimmering plain,
    Painted more soft and fair as they descend
    Almost to touch;--then up again aloft,
    Up with a sally and a flash of speed,
    As if they scorn'd both resting-place and rest!

The ISLANDS, dispersed among these lakes, are neither so numerous nor so
beautiful as might be expected from the account that has been given of
the manner in which the level areas of the vales are so frequently
diversified by rocks, hills, and hillocks, scattered over them; nor are
they ornamented (as are several of the lakes in Scotland and Ireland) by
the remains of castles or other places of defence; nor with the still
more interesting ruins of religious edifices. Every one must regret that
scarcely a vestige is left of the Oratory, consecrated to the Virgin,
which stood upon Chapel-Holm in Windermere, and that the Chauntry has
disappeared, where mass used to be sung, upon St. Herbert's Island,
Derwent-water. The islands of the last-mentioned lake are neither
fortunately placed nor of pleasing shape; but if the wood upon them were
managed with more taste, they might become interesting features in the
landscape. There is a beautiful cluster on Winandermere; a pair
pleasingly contrasted upon Eydal; nor must the solitary green island of
Grasmere be forgotten. In the bosom of each of the lakes of Ennerdale
and Devockwater is a single rock, which, owing to its neighbourhood to
the sea, is--

    The haunt of cormorants and sea-mews' clang,

a music well suited to the stern and wild character of the several
scenes! It may be worth while here to mention (not as an object of
beauty, but of curiosity) that there occasionally appears above the
surface of Derwent-water, and always in the same place, a considerable
tract of spongy ground covered with aquatic plants, which is called the
Floating, but with more propriety might be named the Buoyant, Island;
and, on one of the pools near the lake of Esthwaite, may sometimes be
seen a mossy Islet, with trees upon it, shifting about before the wind,
a _lusus naturae_ frequent on the great rivers of America, and not
unknown in other parts of the world.

        --fas habeas invisere Tiburis arva,
      Albuneaeque lacum, atque umbras terrasque natantes.[51]


[51] See that admirable Idyllium, the Catillus and Salia of Landor.

This part of the subject may be concluded with observing--that, from the
multitude of brooks and torrents that fall into these lakes, and of
internal springs by which they are fed, and which circulate through them
like veins, they are truly living lakes, _'vivi lacus;'_ and are thus
discriminated from the stagnant and sullen pools frequent among
mountains that have been formed by volcanoes, and from the shallow meres
found in flat and fenny countries. The water is also of crystalline
purity; so that, if it were not for the reflections of the incumbent
mountains by which it is darkened, a delusion might be felt, by a person
resting quietly in a boat on the bosom of Winandermere or Derwent-water,
similar to that which Carver so beautifully describes when he was
floating alone in the middle of lake Erie or Ontario, and could almost
have imagined that his boat was suspended in an element as pure as air,
or rather that the air and water were one.

Having spoken of Lakes I must not omit to mention, as a kindred feature
of this country, those bodies of still water called TARNS. In the
economy of Nature these are useful, as auxiliars to Lakes; for if the
whole quantity of water which falls upon the mountains in time of storm
were poured down upon the plains without intervention, in some quarters,
of such receptacles, the habitable grounds would be much more subject
than they are to inundation. But, as some of the collateral brooks spend
their fury, finding a free course toward and also down the channel of
the main stream of the vale before those that have to pass through the
higher tarns and lakes have filled their several basins, a gradual
distribution is effected; and the waters thus reserved, instead of
uniting, to spread ravage and deformity, with those which meet with no
such detention, contribute to support, for a length of time, the vigour
of many streams without a fresh fall of rain. Tarns are found in some of
the vales, and are numerous upon the mountains. A Tarn, in a _Vale_,
implies, for the most part, that the bed of the vale is not happily
formed; that the water of the brooks can neither wholly escape, nor
diffuse itself over a large area. Accordingly, in such situations, Tarns
are often surrounded by an unsightly tract of boggy ground; but this is
not always the case, and in the cultivated parts of the country, when
the shores of the Tarn are determined, it differs only from the Lake in
being smaller, and in belonging mostly to a smaller valley, or circular
recess. Of this class of miniature lakes, Loughrigg Tarn, near Grasmere,
is the most beautiful example. It has a margin of green firm meadows, of
rocks, and rocky woods, a few reeds here, a little company of
water-lilies there, with beds of gravel or stone beyond; a tiny stream
issuing neither briskly nor sluggishly out of it; but its feeding rills,
from the shortness of their course, so small as to be scarcely visible.
Five or six cottages are reflected in its peaceful bosom; rocky and
barren steeps rise up above the hanging enclosures; and the solemn Pikes
of Langdale overlook, from a distance, the low cultivated ridge of land
that forms the northern boundary of this small, quiet, and fertile
domain. The _mountain_ Tarns can only be recommended to the notice of
the inquisitive traveller who has time to spare. They are difficult of
access and naked; yet some of them are, in their permanent forms, very
grand; and there are accidents of things which would make the meanest of
them interesting. At all events, one of these pools is an acceptable
sight to the mountain wanderer; not merely as an incident that
diversifies the prospect, but as forming in his mind a centre or
conspicuous point to which objects, otherwise disconnected or
insubordinated, may be referred. Some few have a varied outline, with
bold heath-clad promontories; and, as they mostly lie at the foot of a
steep precipice, the water, where the sun is not shining upon it,
appears black and sullen; and, round the margin, huge stones and masses
of rock are scattered; some defying conjecture as to the means by which
they came thither; and others obviously fallen from on high--the
contribution of ages! A not unpleasing sadness is induced by this
perplexity, and these images of decay; while the prospect of a body of
pure water unattended with groves and other cheerful rural images, by
which fresh water is usually accompanied, and unable to give furtherance
to the meagre vegetation around it--excites a sense of some repulsive
power strongly put forth, and thus deepens the melancholy natural to
such scenes. Nor is the feeling of solitude often more forcibly or more
solemnly impressed than by the side of one of these mountain pools:
though desolate and forbidding, it seems a distinct place to repair to;
yet where the visitants must be rare, and there can be no disturbance.
Water-fowl flock hither; and the lonely angler may here be seen; but the
imagination, not content with this scanty allowance of society, is
tempted to attribute a voluntary power to every change which takes place
in such a spot, whether it be the breeze that wanders over the surface
of the water, or the splendid lights of evening resting upon it in the
midst of awful precipices.

    There, sometimes does a leaping fish
    Send through the tarn a lonely cheer;
    The crags repeat the raven's croak
    In symphony austere:
    Thither the rainbow comes, the cloud,
    And mists that spread the flying shroud,
    And sunbeams, and the sounding blast.

It will be observed that this country is bounded on the south and east
by the sea, which combines beautifully, from many elevated points, with
the inland scenery; and, from the bay of Morecamb, the sloping shores
and back-ground of distant mountains are seen, composing pictures
equally distinguished for amenity and grandeur. But the aestuaries on
this coast are in a great measure bare at low water[52]; and there is no
instance of the sea running far up among the mountains, and mingling
with the lakes, which are such in the strict and usual sense of the
word, being of fresh water. Nor have the streams, from the shortness of
their course, time to acquire that body of water necessary to confer
upon them much majesty. In fact, the most considerable, while they
continue in the mountain and lake-country, are rather large brooks than
rivers. The water is perfectly pellucid, through which in many places
are seen, to a great depth, their beds of rock, or of blue gravel, which
give to the water itself an exquisitely cerulean colour: this is
particularly striking in the rivers Derwent and Duddon, which may be
compared, such and so various are their beauties, to any two rivers of
equal length of course in any country. The number of the torrents and
smaller brooks is infinite, with their waterfalls and water-breaks; and
they need not here be described. I will only observe that, as many, even
of the smallest rills, have either found, or made for themselves,
recesses in the sides of the mountains or in the vales, they have
tempted the primitive inhabitants to settle near them for shelter; and
hence, cottages so placed, by seeming to withdraw from the eye, are the
more endeared to the feelings.

[52] In fact there is not an instance of a harbour on the Cumberland
side of the Solway frith that is not dry at low water; that of
Ravenglass, at the mouth of the Esk, as a natural harbour is much the
best. The Sea appears to have been retiring slowly for ages from this
coast. From Whitehaven to St. Bees extends a tract of level ground,
about five miles in length, which formerly must have been under salt
water, so as to have made an island of the high ground that stretches
between it and the Sea.

The WOODS consist chiefly of oak, ash, and birch, and here and there
Wych-elm, with underwood of hazel, the white and black thorn, and
hollies; in moist places alders and willows abound; and yews among the
rocks. Formerly the whole country must have been covered with wood to a
great height up the mountains; where native Scotch firs[53] must have
grown in great profusion, as they do in the northern part of Scotland to
this day. But not one of these old inhabitants has existed, perhaps, for
some hundreds of years; the beautiful traces, however, of the universal
sylvan[54] appearance the country formerly had, yet survive in the
native coppice-woods that have been protected by inclosures, and also in
the forest-trees and hollies, which, though disappearing fast, are yet
scattered both over the inclosed and uninclosed parts of the mountains.
The same is expressed by the beauty and intricacy with which the fields
and coppice woods are often intermingled: the plough of the first
settlers having followed naturally the veins of richer, dryer, or less
stony soil; and thus it has shaped out an intermixture of wood and lawn,
with a grace and wildness which it would have been impossible for the
hand of studied art to produce. Other trees have been introduced within
these last fifty years, such as beeches, larches, limes, &c. and
plantations of firs, seldom with advantage, and often with great injury
to the appearance of the country; but the sycamore (which I believe was
brought into this island from Germany, not more than two hundred years
ago) has long been the favourite of the cottagers; and, with the fir,
has been chosen to screen their dwellings: and is sometimes found in the
fields whither the winds or the waters may have carried its seeds.

[53] This species of fir is in character much superior to the American
which has usurped its place: Where the fir is planted for ornament, let
it be by all means of the aboriginal species, which can only be procured
from the Scotch nurseries.

[54] A squirrel (so I have heard the old people of Wytheburn say) might
have gone from their chapel to Keswick without alighting on the ground.

The want most felt, however, is that of timber trees. There are few
_magnificent_ ones to be found near any of the lakes; and unless greater
care be taken, there will, in a short time, scarcely be left an ancient
oak that would repay the cost of felling. The neighbourhood of Rydal,
notwithstanding the havoc which has been made, is yet nobly
distinguished. In the woods of Lowther, also, is found an almost
matchless store of ancient trees, and the majesty and wildness of the
native forest.

Among the smaller vegetable ornaments must be reckoned the bilberry, a
ground plant, never so beautiful as in early spring, when it is seen
under bare or budding trees, that imperfectly intercept the tomb-stone
covering the rocky knolls with a pure mantle of fresh verdure, more
lively than the herbage of the open fields;--the broom, that spreads
luxuriantly along rough pastures, and in the month of June interveins
the steep copses with its golden blossoms;--and the juniper, a rich
evergreen, that thrives in spite of cattle, upon the uninclosed parts of
the mountains:--the Dutch myrtle diffuses fragrance in moist places;
and there is an endless variety of brilliant flowers in the fields and
meadows, which, if the agriculture of the country were more carefully
attended to, would disappear. Nor can I omit again to notice the lichens
and mosses: their profusion, beauty, and variety, exceed those of any
other country I have seen.

It may now be proper to say a few words respecting climate, and 'skiey
influences,' in which this region, as far as the character of its
landscapes is affected by them, may, upon the whole, be considered
fortunate. The country is, indeed, subject to much bad weather, and it
has been ascertained that twice as much rain falls here as in many parts
of the island; but the number of black drizzling days, that blot out the
face of things, is by no means _proportionally_ great. Nor is a
continuance of thick, flagging, damp air, so common as in the West of
England and Ireland. The rain here comes down heartily, and is
frequently succeeded by clear, bright weather, when every brook is
vocal, and every torrent sonorous; brooks and torrents, which are never
muddy, even in the heaviest floods, except, after a drought, they
happen to be defiled for a short time by waters that have swept along
dusty roads, or have broken out into ploughed fields. Days of unsettled
weather, with partial showers, are very frequent; but the showers,
darkening, or brightning, as they fly from hill to hill, are not less
grateful to the eye than finely interwoven passages of gay and sad music
are touching to the ear. Vapours exhaling from the lakes and meadows
after sun-rise, in a hot season, or, in moist weather, brooding upon the
heights, or descending towards the valleys with inaudible motion, give a
visionary character to every thing around them; and are in themselves so
beautiful, as to dispose us to enter into the feelings of those simple
nations (such as the Laplanders of this day) by whom they are taken for
guardian deities of the mountains; or to sympathise with others, who
have fancied these delicate apparitions to be the spirits of their
departed ancestors. Akin to these are fleecy clouds resting upon the
hill-tops; they are not easily managed in picture, with their
accompaniments of blue sky; but how glorious are they in Nature! how
pregnant with imagination for the poet! and the height of the Cumbrian
mountains is sufficient to exhibit daily and hourly instances of those
mysterious attachments. Such clouds, cleaving to their stations, or
lifting up suddenly their glittering heads from behind rocky barriers,
or hurrying out of sight with speed of the sharpest sledge--will often
tempt an inhabitant to congratulate himself on belonging to a country of
mists and clouds and storms, and make him think of the blank sky of
Egypt, and of the cerulean vacancy of Italy, as an unanimated and even a
sad spectacle. The atmosphere, however, as in every country subject to
much rain, is frequently unfavourable to landscape, especially when keen
winds succeed the rain which are apt to produce coldness, spottiness,
and an unmeaning or repulsive detail in the distance;--a sunless
frost, under a canopy of leaden and shapeless clouds, is, as far as it
allows things to be seen, equally disagreeable.

It has been said that in human life there are moments worth ages. In a
more subdued tone of sympathy may we affirm, that in the climate of
England there are, for the lover of Nature, days which are worth whole
months,--I might say--even years. One of these favoured days
sometimes occurs in spring-time, when that soft air is breathing over
the blossoms and new-born verdure, which inspired Buchanan with his
beautiful Ode to the first of May; the air, which, in the luxuriance of
his fancy, he likens to that of the golden age,--to that which gives
motion to the funereal cypresses on the banks of Lethe;--to the air
which is to salute beatified spirits when expiatory fires shall have
consumed the earth with all her habitations. But it is in autumn that
days of such affecting influence most frequently intervene;--the
atmosphere seems refined, and the sky rendered more crystalline, as the
vivifying heat of the year abates; the lights and shadows are more
delicate; the colouring is richer and more finely harmonised; and, in
this season of stillness, the ear being unoccupied, or only gently
excited, the sense of vision becomes more susceptible of its appropriate
enjoyments. A resident in a country like this which we are treating of,
will agree with me, that the presence of a lake is indispensable to
exhibit in perfection the beauty of one of these days; and he must have
experienced, while looking on the unruffled waters, that the
imagination, by their aid, is carried into recesses of feeling otherwise
impenetrable. The reason of this is, that the heavens are not only
brought down into the bosom of the earth, but that the earth is mainly
looked at, and thought of, through the medium of a purer element. The
happiest time is when the equinoxial gales are departed; but their fury
may probably be called to mind by the sight of a few shattered boughs,
whose leaves do not differ in colour from the faded foliage of the
stately oaks from which these relics of the storm depend: all else
speaks of tranquillity;--not a breath of air, no restlessness of
insects, and not a moving object perceptible--except the clouds
gliding in the depths of the lake, or the traveller passing along, an
inverted image, whose motion seems governed by the quiet of a time, to
which its archetype, the living person, is, perhaps, insensible:--or
it may happen, that the figure of one of the larger birds, a raven or a
heron, is crossing silently among the reflected clouds, while the voice
of the real bird, from the element aloft, gently awakens in the
spectator the recollection of appetites and instincts, pursuits and
occupations, that deform and agitate the world,--yet have no power to
prevent Nature from putting on an aspect capable of satisfying the most
intense cravings for the tranquil, the lovely, and the perfect, to which
man, the noblest of her creatures, is subject.

Thus far, of climate, as influencing the feelings through its effect on
the objects of sense. We may add, that whatever has been said upon the
advantages derived to these scenes from a changeable atmosphere, would
apply, perhaps still more forcibly, to their appearance under the varied
solemnities of night. Milton, it will be remembered, has given a
_clouded_ moon to Paradise itself. In the night-season also, the
narrowness of the vales, and comparative smallness of the lakes, are
especially adapted to bring surrounding objects home to the eye and to
the heart. The stars, taking their stations above the hill-tops, are
contemplated from a spot like the Abyssinian recess of Rasselas, with
much more touching interest than they are likely to excite when looked
at from an open country with ordinary undulations: and it must be
obvious, that it is the _bays_ only of large lakes that can present such
contrasts of light and shadow as those of smaller dimensions display
from every quarter. A deep contracted valley, with diffused waters, such
a valley and plains level and wide as those of Chaldea, are the two
extremes in which the beauty of the heavens and their connexion with the
earth are most sensibly felt. Nor do the advantages I have been speaking
of imply here an exclusion of the aerial effects of distance. These are
insured by the height of the mountains, and are found, even in the
narrowest vales, where they lengthen in perspective, or act (if the
expression may be used) as telescopes for the open country.

The subject would bear to be enlarged upon: but I will conclude this
section with a night-scene suggested by the Vale of Keswick. The
Fragment is well known; but it gratifies me to insert it, as the Writer
was one of the first who led the way to a worthy admiration of this
country.

    Now sunk the sun, now twilight sunk, and night
    Rode in her zenith; not a passing breeze
    Sigh'd to the grove, which in the midnight air
    Stood motionless, and in the peaceful floods
    Inverted hung: for now the billows slept
    Along the shore, nor heav'd the deep; but spread
    A shining mirror to the moon's pale orb,
    Which, dim and waning, o'er the shadowy cliffs,
    The solemn woods, and spiry mountain tops,
    Her glimmering faintness threw: now every eye,
    Oppress'd with toil, was drown'd in deep repose,
    Save that the unseen Shepherd in his watch,
    Propp'd on his crook, stood listening by the fold,
    And gaz'd the starry vault, and pendant moon;
    Nor voice, nor sound, broke on the deep serene;
    But the soft murmur of swift-gushing rills,
    Forth issuing from the mountain's distant steep,
    (Unheard till now, and now scarce heard) proclaim'd
    All things at rest, and imag'd the still voice
    Of quiet, whispering in the ear of Night.[55]

[55] Dr. Brown, the author of this fragment, was from his infancy
brought up in Cumberland, and should have remembered that the practice
of folding sheep by night is unknown among these mountains, and that the
image of the Shepherd upon the watch is out of its place, and belongs
only to countries, with a warmer climate, that are subject to ravages
from beasts of prey. It is pleasing to notice a dawn of imaginative
feeling in these verses. Tickel, a man of no common genius, chose, for
the subject of a Poem, Kensington Gardens, in preference to the Banks of
the Derwent, within a mile or two of which he was born. But this was in
the reign of Queen Anne, or George the first. Progress must have been
made in the interval; though the traces of it, except in the works of
Thomson and Dyer, are not very obvious.

       *       *       *       *       *




SECTION SECOND.

ASPECT OF THE COUNTRY, AS AFFECTED BY ITS INHABITANTS.

Hitherto I have chiefly spoken of the features by which Nature has
discriminated this country from others. I will now describe, in general
terms, in what manner it is indebted to the hand of man. What I have to
notice on this subject will emanate most easily and perspicuously from a
description of the ancient and present inhabitants, their occupations,
their condition of life, the distribution of landed property among them,
and the tenure by which it is holden.

The reader will suffer me here to recall to his mind the shapes of the
vallies, and their position with respect to each other, and the forms
and substance of the intervening mountains. He will people the vallies
with lakes and rivers: the coves and sides of the mountains with pools
and torrents; and will bound half of the circle which we have
contemplated by the sands of the sea, or by the sea itself. He will
conceive that, from the point upon which he stood, he looks down upon
this scene before the country had been penetrated by any
inhabitants:---to vary his sensations, and to break in upon their
stillness, he will form to himself an image of the tides visiting and
re-visiting the friths, the main sea dashing against the bolder shore,
the rivers pursuing their course to be lost in the mighty mass of
waters. He may see or hear in fancy the winds sweeping over the lakes,
or piping with a loud voice among the mountain peaks; and, lastly, may
think of the primeval woods shedding and renewing their leaves with no
human eye to notice, or human heart to regret or welcome the change.
'When the first settlers entered this region (says an animated writer)
they found it overspread with wood; forest trees, the fir, the oak, the
ash, and the birch had skirted the fells, tufted the hills, and shaded
the vallies, through centuries of silent solitude; the birds and beasts
of prey reigned over the meeker species; and the _bellum inter omnia_
maintained the balance of Nature in the empire of beasts.'

Such was the state and appearance of this region when the aboriginal
colonists of the Celtic tribes were first driven or drawn towards it,
and became joint tenants with the wolf, the boar, the wild bull, the red
deer, and the leigh, a gigantic species of deer which has been long
extinct; while the inaccessible crags were occupied by the falcon, the
raven, and the eagle. The inner parts were too secluded, and of too
little value, to participate much of the benefit of Roman manners; and
though these conquerors encouraged the Britons to the improvement of
their lands in the plain country of Furness and Cumberland, they seem to
have had little connexion with the mountains, except for military
purposes, or in subservience to the profit they drew from the mines.

When the Romans retired from Great Britain, it is well known that these
mountain-fastnesses furnished a protection to some unsubdued Britons,
long after the more accessible and more fertile districts had been
seized by the Saxon or Danish invader. A few, though distinct, traces of
Roman forts or camps, as at Ambleside, and upon Dunmallet, and a few
circles of rude stones attributed to the Druids[56], are the only
vestiges that remain upon the surface of the country, of these ancient
occupants; and, as the Saxons and Danes, who succeeded to the possession
of the villages and hamlets which had been established by the Britons,
seem at first to have confined themselves to the open country,--we may
descend at once to times long posterior to the conquest by the Normans,
when their feudal polity was regularly established. We may easily
conceive that these narrow dales and mountain sides, choaked up as they
must have been with wood, lying out of the way of communication with
other parts of the Island, and upon the edge of a hostile kingdom, could
have little attraction for the high-born and powerful; especially as the
more open parts of the country furnished positions for castles and
houses of defence, sufficient to repel any of those sudden attacks,
which, in the then rude state of military knowledge, could be made upon
them. Accordingly, the more retired regions (and to such I am now
confining myself) must have been neglected or shunned even by the
persons whose baronial or signioral rights extended over them, and left,
doubtless, partly as a place of refuge for outlaws and robbers, and
partly granted out for the more settled habitation of a few vassals
following the employment of shepherds or woodlanders. Hence these lakes
and inner vallies are unadorned by any remains of ancient grandeur,
castles, or monastic edifices, which are only found upon the skirts of
the country, as Furness Abbey, Calder Abbey, the Priory of Lannercost,
Gleaston Castle,--long ago a residence of the Flemings,--and the
numerous ancient castles of the Cliffords, the Lucys, and the Dacres. On
the southern side of these mountains, (especially in that part known by
the name of Furness Fells, which is more remote from the borders,) the
state of society would necessarily be more settled; though it also was
fashioned, not a little, by its neighbourhood to a hostile kingdom. We
will, therefore, give a sketch of the economy of the Abbots in the
distribution of lands among their tenants, as similar plans were
doubtless adopted by other Lords, and as the consequences have affected
the face of the country materially to the present day, being, in fact,
one of the principal causes which give it such a striking superiority,
in beauty and interest, over all other parts of the island.

[56] It is not improbable that these circles were once numerous, and
that many of them may yet endure in a perfect state, under no very deep
covering of soil. A friend of the Author, while making a trench in a
level piece of ground, not far from the banks of the Emont, but in no
connection with that river, met with some stones which seemed to him
formally arranged; this excited his curiosity, and proceeding, he
uncovered a perfect circle of stones, from two to three or four feet
high, with a _sanctum sanctorum_,--the whole a complete place of
Druidical worship of small dimensions, having the same sort of relation
to Stonehenge, Long Meg and her Daughters near the river Eden, and Karl
Lofts near Shap (if this last be not Danish), that a rural chapel bears
to a stately church, or to one of our noble cathedrals. This interesting
little monument having passed, with the field in which it was found,
into other hands, has been destroyed. It is much to be regretted, that
the striking relic of antiquity at Shap has been in a great measure
destroyed also.

The DAUGHTERS of LONG MEG are placed not in an oblong, as the STONES of
SHAP, but in a perfect circle, eighty yards in diameter, and seventy-two
in number, and from above three yards high, to less than so many feet: a
little way out of the circle stands LONG MEG herself--a single stone
eighteen feet high.

When the Author first saw this monument, he came upon it by surprize,
therefore might over-rate its importance as an object; but he must say,
that though it is not to be compared with Stonehenge, he has not seen
any other remains of those dark ages, which can pretend to rival it in
singularity and dignity of appearance.

     A weight of awe not easy to be borne
     Fell suddenly upon my spirit, cast
     From the dread bosom of the unknown past,
     When first I saw that sisterhood forlorn;--
     And Her, whose strength and stature seem to scorn
     The power of years--pre-eminent, and placed
     Apart, to overlook the circle vast.
     Speak, Giant-mother! tell it to the Morn,
     While she dispels the cumbrous shades of night;
     Let the Moon hear, emerging from a cloud,
     When, how, and wherefore, rose on British ground
     That wondrous Monument, whose mystic round
     Forth shadows, some have deemed, to mortal sight
     The inviolable God that tames the proud.

'When the Abbots of Furness,' says an author before cited, 'enfranchised
their villains, and raised them to the dignity of customary tenants, the
lands, which they had cultivated for their lord, were divided into whole
tenements; each of which, besides the customary annual rent, was charged
with the obligation of having in readiness a man completely armed for
the king's service on the borders, or elsewhere; each of these whole
tenements was again subdivided into four equal parts; each villain had
one; and the party tenant contributed his share to the support of the
man of arms, and of other burdens. These divisions were not properly
distinguished; the land remained mixed; each tenant had a share through
all the arable and meadow-land, and common of pasture over all the
wastes. These sub-tenements were judged sufficient for the support of so
many families; and no further division was permitted. These divisions
and sub-divisions were convenient at the time for which they were
calculated: the land, so parcelled out, was of necessity more attended
to, and the industry greater, when more persons were to be supported by
the produce of it. The frontier of the kingdom, within which Furness was
considered, was in a constant state of attack and defence; more hands,
therefore, were necessary to guard the coast, to repel an invasion from
Scotland, or make reprisals on the hostile neighbour. The dividing the
lands in such manner as has been shown, increased the number of
inhabitants, and kept them at home till called for: and, the land being
mixed, and the several tenants united in equipping the plough, the
absence of the fourth man was no prejudice to the cultivation of his
land, which was committed to the care of three.

'While the villains of Low Furness were thus distributed over the land,
and employed in agriculture; those of High Furness were charged with the
care of flocks and herds, to protect them from the wolves which lurked
in the thickets, and in winter to browze them with the tender sprouts of
hollies and ash. This custom was not till lately discontinued in High
Furness; and holly-trees were carefully preserved for that purpose when
all other wood was cleared off; large tracts of common being so covered
with these trees, as to have the appearance of a forest of hollies. At
the Shepherd's call, the flocks surrounded the holly-bush, and received
the croppings at his hand, which they greedily nibbled up, bleating for
more. The Abbots of Furness enfranchised these pastoral vassals, and
permitted them to enclose _quillets_ to their houses, for which they
paid encroachment rent.'--West's _Antiquities of Furness_.

However desirable, for the purposes of defence, a numerous population
might be, it was not possible to make at once the same numerous
allotments among the untilled vallies, and upon the sides of the
mountains, as had been made in the cultivated plains. The enfranchised
shepherd or woodlander, having chosen there his place of residence,
builds it of sods, or of the mountain-stone, and, with the permission of
his lord, encloses, like Robinson Crusoe, a small croft or two
immediately at his door for such animals as he wishes to protect. Others
are happy to imitate his example, and avail themselves of the same
privileges: and thus a population, mainly of Danish or Norse origin, as
the dialect indicates, crept on towards the more secluded parts of the
vallies. Chapels, daughters of some distant mother church, are first
erected in the more open and fertile vales, as those of Bowness and
Grasmere, offsets of Kendal: which again, after a period, as the settled
population increases, become motherchurches to smaller edifices,
planted, at length, in almost every dale throughout the country. The
inclosures, formed by the tenantry, are for a long time confined to the
home-steads; and the arable and meadow land of the vales is possessed in
common field; the several portions being marked out by stones, bushes,
or trees; which portions, where the custom has survived, to this day are
called _dales_, from the word _deylen_, to distribute; but, while the
valley was thus lying open, enclosures seem to have taken place upon the
sides of the mountains; because the land there was not intermixed, and
was of little comparative value; and, therefore, small opposition would
be made to its being appropriated by those to whose habitations it was
contiguous. Hence the singular appearance which the sides of many of
these mountains exhibit, intersected, as they are, almost to the summit,
with stone walls. When first erected, these stone fences must have
little disfigured the face of the country; as part of the lines would
every where be hidden by the quantity of native wood then remaining; and
the lines would also be broken (as they still are) by the rocks which
interrupt and vary their course. In the meadows, and in those parts of
the lower grounds where the soil has not been sufficiently drained, and
could not afford a stable foundation, there, when the increasing value
of land, and the inconvenience suffered from intermixed plots of ground
in common field, had induced each inhabitant to enclose his own, they
were compelled to make the fences of alders, willows, and other trees.
These, where the native wood had disappeared, have frequently enriched
the vallies with a sylvan appearance; while the intricate intermixture
of property has given to the fences a graceful irregularity, which,
where large properties are prevalent, and large capitals employed in
agriculture, is unknown. This sylvan appearance is heightened by the
number of ash-trees planted in rows along the quick fences, and along
the walls, for the purpose of browzing the cattle at the approach of
winter. The branches are lopped off and strewn upon the pastures; and
when the cattle have stripped them of the leaves, they are used for
repairing the hedges or for fuel.

We have thus seen a numerous body of Dalesmen creeping into possession
of their home-steads, their little crofts, their mountain-enclosures;
and, finally, the whole vale is visibly divided; except, perhaps, here
and there some marshy ground, which, till fully drained, would not
repay the trouble of enclosing. But these last partitions do not seem to
have been general, till long after the pacification of the Borders, by
the union of the two crowns: when the cause, which had first determined
the distribution of land into such small parcels, had not only
ceased,--but likewise a general improvement had taken place in the
country, with a correspondent rise in the value of its produce. From the
time of the union, it is certain that this species of feudal population
must rapidly have diminished. That it was formerly much more numerous
than it is at present, is evident from the multitude of tenements (I do
not mean houses, but small divisions of land) which belonged formerly
each to a several proprietor, and for which separate fines are paid to
the manorial lord at this day. These are often in the proportion of four
to one of the present occupants. 'Sir Launcelot Threlkeld, who lived in
the reign of Henry VII., was wont to say, he had three noble houses, one
for pleasure, Crosby, in Westmoreland, where he had a park full of deer;
one for profit and warmth, wherein to reside in winter, namely, Yanwith,
nigh Penrith; and the third, Threlkeld, (on the edge of the vale of
Keswick,) well stocked with tenants to go with him to the wars.' But, as
I have said, from the union of the two crowns, this numerous vassalage
(their services not being wanted) would rapidly diminish; various
tenements would be united in one possessor; and the aboriginal houses,
probably little better than hovels, like the kraels of savages, or the
huts of the Highlanders of Scotland, would fall into decay, and the
places of many be supplied by substantial and comfortable buildings, a
majority of which remain to this day scattered over the vallies, and are
often the only dwellings found in them.

From the time of the erection of these houses, till within the last
sixty years, the state of society, though no doubt slowly and gradually
improving, underwent no material change. Corn was grown in these vales
(through which no carriage-road had yet been made) sufficient upon each
estate to furnish bread for each family, and no more: notwithstanding
the union of several tenements, the possessions of each inhabitant still
being small, in the same field was seen an intermixture of different
crops; and the plough was interrupted by little rocks, mostly overgrown
with wood, or by spongy places, which the tillers of the soil had
neither leisure nor capital to convert into firm land. The storms and
moisture of the climate induced them to sprinkle their upland property
with outhouses of native stone, as places of shelter for their sheep,
where, in tempestuous weather, food was distributed to them. Every
family spun from its own flock the wool with which it was clothed; a
weaver was here and there found among them; and the rest of their wants
was supplied by the produce of the yarn, which they carded and spun in
their own houses, and carried to market, either under their arms, or
more frequently on pack-horses, a small train taking their way weekly
down the valley or over the mountains to the most commodious town. They
had, as I have said, their rural chapel, and of course their minister,
in clothing or in manner of life, in no respect differing from
themselves, except on the Sabbath-day; this was the sole distinguished
individual among them; every thing else, person and possession,
exhibited a perfect equality, a community of shepherds and
agriculturists, proprietors, for the most part, of the lands which they
occupied and cultivated.

While the process above detailed was going on, the native forest must
have been every where receding; but trees were planted for the
sustenance of the flocks in winter,--such was then the rude state of
agriculture; and, for the same cause, it was necessary that care should
be taken of some part of the growth of the native woods. Accordingly, in
Queen Elizabeth's time, this was so strongly felt, that a petition was
made to the Crown, praying, 'that the Blomaries in High Furness might be
abolished, on account of the quantity of wood which was consumed in them
for the use of the mines, to the great detriment of the cattle.' But
this same cause, about a hundred years after, produced effects directly
contrary to those which had been deprecated. The re-establishment, at
that period, of furnaces upon a large scale, made it the interest of the
people to convert the steeper and more stony of the enclosures,
sprinkled over with remains of the native forest, into close woods,
which, when cattle and sheep were excluded, rapidly sowed and thickened
themselves. The reader's attention has been directed to the cause by
which tufts of wood, pasturage, meadow, and arable land, with its
various produce, are intricately intermingled in the same field; and he
will now see, in like manner, how enclosures entirely of wood, and
those of cultivated ground, are blended all over the country under a law
of similar wildness.

An historic detail has thus been given of the manner in which the hand
of man has acted upon the surface of the inner regions of this
mountainous country, as incorporated with and subservient to the powers
and processes of Nature. We will now take a view of the same
agency--acting, within narrower bounds, for the production of the few
works of art and accommodations of life which, in so simple a state of
society, could be necessary. These are merely habitations of man and
coverts for beasts, roads and bridges, and places of worship.

And to begin with the COTTAGES. They are scattered over the vallies, and
under the hill sides, and on the rocks; and, even to this day, in the
more retired dales, without any intrusion of more assuming buildings;

    Cluster'd like stars some few, but single most,
    And lurking dimly in their shy retreats,
    Or glancing on each other cheerful looks,
    Like separated stars with clouds between.--MS.

The dwelling-houses, and contiguous outhouses, are, in many instances,
of the colour of the native rock, out of which they have been built;
but, frequently the Dwelling or Fire-house, as it is ordinarily called,
has been distinguished from the barn or byer by rough-cast and white
wash, which, as the inhabitants are not hasty in renewing it, in a few
years acquires, by the influence of weather, a tint at once sober and
variegated. As these houses have been, from father to son, inhabited by
persons engaged in the same occupations, yet necessarily with changes in
their circumstances, they have received without incongruity additions
and accommodations adapted to the needs of each successive occupant,
who, being for the most part proprietor, was at liberty to follow his
own fancy: so that these humble dwellings remind the contemplative
spectator of a production of Nature, and may (using a strong expression)
rather be said to have grown than to have been erected;--to have risen,
by an instinct of their own, out of the native rock--so little is there
in them of formality, such is their wildness and beauty. Among the
numerous recesses and projections in the walls and in the different
stages of their roofs, are seen bold and harmonious effects of
contrasted sunshine and shadow. It is a favourable circumstance, that
the strong winds, which sweep down the vallies, induced the inhabitants,
at a time when the materials for building were easily procured, to
furnish many of these dwellings with substantial porches; and such as
have not this defence, are seldom unprovided with a projection of two
large slates over their thresholds. Nor will the singular beauty of the
chimneys escape the eye of the attentive traveller. Sometimes a low
chimney, almost upon a level with the roof, is overlaid with a slate,
supported upon four slender pillars, to prevent the wind from driving
the smoke down the chimney. Others are of a quadrangular shape, rising
one or two feet above the roof; which low square is often surmounted by
a tall cylinder, giving to the cottage chimney the most beautiful shape
in which it is ever seen. Nor will it be too fanciful or refined to
remark, that there is a pleasing harmony between a tall chimney of this
circular form, and the living column of smoke, ascending from it through
the still air. These dwellings, mostly built, as has been said, of rough
unhewn stone, are roofed with slates, which were rudely taken from the
quarry before the present art of splitting them was understood, and are,
therefore, rough and uneven in their surface, so that both the coverings
and sides of the houses have furnished places of rest for the seeds of
lichens, mosses, ferns, and flowers. Hence buildings, which in their
very form call to mind the processes of Nature, do thus, clothed in part
with a vegetable garb, appear to be received into the bosom of the
living principle of things, as it acts and exists among the woods and
fields; and, by their colour and their shape, affectingly direct the
thoughts to that tranquil course of Nature and simplicity, along which
the humble-minded inhabitants have, through so many generations, been
led. Add the little garden with its shed for bee-hives, its small bed of
pot-herbs, and its borders and patches of flowers for Sunday posies,
with sometimes a choice few too much prized to be plucked; an orchard of
proportioned size; a cheese-press, often supported by some tree near the
door; a cluster of embowering sycamores for summer shade; with a tall
fir, through which the winds sing when other trees are leafless; the
little rill or household spout murmuring in all seasons;--combine these
incidents and images together, and you have the representative idea of a
mountain-cottage in this country so beautifully formed in itself, and
so richly adorned by the hand of Nature.

Till within the last sixty years there was no communication between any
of these vales by carriage-roads; all bulky articles were transported on
pack-horses. Owing, however, to the population not being concentrated in
villages, but scattered, the vallies themselves were intersected as now
by innumerable lanes and pathways leading from house to house and from
field to field. These lanes, where they are fenced by stone walls, are
mostly bordered with ashes, hazels, wild roses, and beds of tall fern,
at their base; while the walls themselves, if old, are overspread with
mosses, small ferns, wild strawberries, the geranium, and lichens: and,
if the wall happen to rest against a bank of earth, it is sometimes
almost wholly concealed by a rich facing of stone-fern. It is a great
advantage to a traveller or resident, that these numerous lanes and
paths, if he be a zealous admirer of Nature, will lead him on into all
the recesses of the country, so that the hidden treasures of its
landscapes may, by an ever-ready guide, be laid open to his eyes.

Likewise to the smallness of the several properties is owing the great
number of bridges over the brooks and torrents, and the daring and
graceful neglect of danger or accommodation with which so many of them
are constructed, the rudeness of the forms of some, and their endless
variety. But, when I speak of this rudeness, I must at the same time
add, that many of these structures are in themselves models of elegance,
as if they had been formed upon principles of the most thoughtful
architecture. It is to be regretted that these monuments of the skill of
our ancestors, and of that happy instinct by which consummate beauty was
produced, are disappearing fast; but sufficient specimens remain[57] to
give a high gratification to the man of genuine taste.

[57] Written some time ago. The injury done since, is more than could
have been calculated upon.

_Singula de nobis anni praedantur euntes_. This is in the course of
things; but why should the genius that directed the ancient architecture
of these vales have deserted them? For the bridges, churches, mansions,
cottages, and their richly fringed and flat-roofed outhouses, venerable
as the grange of some old abbey, have been substituted structures, in
which baldness only seems to have been studied, or plans of the most
vulgar utility. But some improvement may be looked for in future; the
gentry _recently_ have copied the old models, and successful instances
might be pointed out, if I could take the liberty.

Travellers who may not have been accustomed to pay attention to things
so inobtrusive, will excuse me if I point out the proportion between the
span and elevation of the arch, the lightness of the parapet, and the
graceful manner in which its curve follows faithfully that of the arch.

Upon this subject I have nothing further to notice, except the PLACES OF
WORSHIP, which have mostly a little school-house adjoining[58]. The
architecture of these churches and chapels, where they have not been
recently rebuilt or modernised, is of a style not less appropriate and
admirable than that of the dwelling-houses and other structures. How
sacred the spirit by which our forefathers were directed! The _Religio
loci_ is no where violated by these unstinted, yet unpretending, works
of human hands. They exhibit generally a well-proportioned oblong, with
a suitable porch, in some instances a steeple tower, and in others
nothing more than a small belfry, in which one or two bells hang
visibly. But these objects, though pleasing in their forms, must
necessarily, more than others in rural scenery, derive their interest
from the sentiments of piety and reverence for the modest virtues and
simple manners of humble life with which they may be contemplated. A man
must be very insensible who would not be touched with pleasure at the
sight of the chapel of Buttermere, so strikingly expressing, by its
diminutive size, how small must be the congregation there assembled, as
it were, like one family; and proclaiming at the same time to the
passenger, in connection with the surrounding mountains, the depth of
that seclusion in which the people live, that has rendered necessary the
building of a separate place of worship for so few. A patriot, calling
to mind the images of the stately fabrics of Canterbury, York, or
Westminster, will find a heartfelt satisfaction in presence of this
lowly pile, as a monument of the wise institutions of our country, and
as evidence of the all-pervading and paternal care of that venerable
Establishment, of which it is, perhaps, the humblest daughter. The
edifice is scarcely larger than many of the single stones or fragments
of rock which are scattered near it.

[58] In some places scholars were formerly taught in the church, and at
others the school-house was a sort of anti-chapel to the place of
worship, being under the same roof; an arrangement which was abandoned
as irreverent. It continues, however, to this day in Borrowdale. In the
parish register of that chapelry is a notice, that a youth who had
quitted the valley, and died in one of the towns on the coast of
Cumberland, had requested that his body should be brought and interred
at the foot of the pillar by which he had been accustomed to sit while a
school-boy. One cannot but regret that parish registers so seldom
contain any thing but bare names; in a few of this country, especially
in that of Lowes-water, I have found interesting notices of unusual
natural occurrences--characters of the deceased, and particulars of
their lives. There is no good reason why such memorials should not be
frequent; these short and simple annals would in future ages become
precious.

We have thus far confined our observations, on this division of the
subject, to that part of these Dales which runs up far into the
mountains.

As we descend towards the open country, we meet with halls and mansions,
many of which have been places of defence against the incursions of the
Scottish borderers; and they not unfrequently retain their towers and
battlements. To these houses, parks are sometimes attached, and to their
successive proprietors we chiefly owe whatever ornament is still left to
the country of majestic timber. Through the open parts of the vales are
scattered, also, houses of a middle rank between the pastoral cottage
and the old hall residence of the knight or esquire. Such houses differ
much from the rugged cottages before described, and are generally graced
with a little court or garden in front, where may yet be seen specimens
of those fantastic and quaint figures which our ancestors were fond of
shaping out in yew-tree, holly, or box-wood. The passenger will
sometimes smile at such elaborate display of petty art, while the house
does not deign to look upon the natural beauty or the sublimity which
its situation almost unavoidably commands.

Thus has been given a faithful description, the minuteness of which the
reader will pardon, of the face of this country as it was, and had been
through centuries, till within the last sixty years. Towards the head of
these Dales was found a perfect Republic of Shepherds and
Agriculturists, among whom the plough of each man was confined to the
maintenance of his own family, or to the occasional accommodation of his
neighbour[59].

[59] One of the most pleasing characteristics of manners in secluded and
thinly-peopled districts, is a sense of the degree in which human
happiness and comfort are dependent on the contingency of neighbourhood.
This is implied by a rhyming adage common here, '_Friends are far, when
neighbours are nar_' (near). This mutual helpfulness is not confined to
out-of-doors work; but is ready upon all occasions. Formerly, if a
person became sick, especially the mistress of a family, it was usual
for those of the neighbours who were more particularly connected with
the party by amicable offices, to visit the house, carrying a present;
this practice, which is by no means obsolete, is called _owning_ the
family, and is regarded as a pledge of a disposition to be otherwise
serviceable in a time of disability and distress.

Two or three cows furnished each family with milk and cheese. The
chapel was the only edifice that presided over these dwellings, the
supreme head of this pure Commonwealth; the members of which existed in
the midst of a powerful empire, like an ideal society or an organised
community, whose constitution had been imposed and regulated by the
mountains which protected it. Neither high-born nobleman, knight, nor
esquire, was here; but many of these humble sons of the hills had a
consciousness that the land, which they walked over and tilled, had for
more than five hundred years been possessed by men of their name and
blood; and venerable was the transition, when a curious traveller,
descending from the heart of the mountains, had come to some ancient
manorial residence in the more open parts of the Vales, which, through
the rights attached to its proprietor, connected the almost visionary
mountain republic he had been contemplating with the substantial frame
of society as existing in the laws and constitution of a mighty empire.

       *       *       *       *       *


SECTION THIRD.

CHANGES, AND BULKS OF TASTE FOR PREVENTING THEIR BAD EFFECTS.

Such, as hath been said, was the appearance of things till within the
last sixty years. A practice, denominated Ornamental Gardening, was at
that time becoming prevalent over England. In union with an admiration
of this art, and in some instances in opposition to it, had been
generated a relish for select parts of natural scenery: and Travellers,
instead of confining their observations to Towns, Manufactories, or
Mines, began (a thing till then unheard of) to wander over the island in
search of sequestered spots, distinguished as they might accidentally
have learned, for the sublimity or beauty of the forms of Nature there
to be seen.--Dr. Brown, the celebrated Author of the _Estimate of the
Manners and Principles of the Times_, published a letter to a friend, in
which the attractions of the Vale of Keswick were delineated with a
powerful pencil, and the feeling of a genuine Enthusiast. Gray, the
Poet, followed: he died soon after his forlorn and melancholy pilgrimage
to the Vale of Keswick, and the record left behind him of what he had
seen and felt in this journey, excited that pensive interest with which
the human mind is ever disposed to listen to the farewell words of a man
of genius. The journal of Gray feelingly showed how the gloom of ill
health and low spirits had been irradiated by objects, which the
Author's powers of mind enabled him to describe with distinctness and
unaffected simplicity. Every reader of this journal must have been
impressed with the words which conclude his notice of the Vale of
Grasmere:--'Not a single red tile, no flaring gentleman's house or
garden-wall, breaks in upon the repose of this little unsuspected
paradise; but all is peace, rusticity, and happy poverty, in its neatest
and most becoming attire.'

What is here so justly said of Grasmere applied almost equally to all
its sister Vales. It was well for the undisturbed pleasure of the Poet
that he had no forebodings of the change which was soon to take place;
and it might have been hoped that these words, indicating how much the
charm of what _was_, depended upon what was _not_, would of themselves
have preserved the ancient franchises of this and other kindred mountain
retirements from trespass; or (shall I dare to say?) would have secured
scenes so consecrated from profanation. The lakes had now become
celebrated; visitors flocked hither from all parts of England; the
fancies of some were smitten so deeply, that they became settlers; and
the Islands of Derwent-water and Winandermere, as they offered the
strongest temptation, were the first places seized upon, and were
instantly defaced by the intrusion.

The venerable wood that had grown for centuries round the small house
called St. Herbert's Hermitage, had indeed some years before been felled
by its native proprietor, and the whole island planted anew with Scotch
firs, left to spindle up by each other's side--a melancholy phalanx,
defying the power of the winds, and disregarding the regret of the
spectator, who might otherwise have cheated himself into a belief, that
some of the decayed remains of those oaks, the place of which was in
this manner usurped, had been planted by the Hermit's own hand. This
sainted spot, however, suffered comparatively little injury. At the
bidding of an alien improver, the Hind's Cottage, upon Vicar's island,
in the same lake, with its embowering sycamores and cattle-shed,
disappeared from the corner where they stood; and right in the middle,
and upon the precise point of the island's highest elevation, rose a
tall square habitation, with four sides exposed, like an astronomer's
observatory, or a warren-house reared upon an eminence for the detection
of depredators, or, like the temple of Oeolus, where all the winds pay
him obeisance. Round this novel structure, but at a respectful distance,
platoons of firs were stationed, as if to protect their commander when
weather and time should somewhat have shattered his strength. Within the
narrow limits of this island were typified also the state and strength
of a kingdom, and its religion as it had been, and was,--for neither was
the druidical circle uncreated, nor the church of the present
establishment; nor the stately pier, emblem of commerce and navigation;
nor the fort to deal out thunder upon the approaching invader. The taste
of a succeeding proprietor rectified the mistakes as far as was
practicable, and has ridded the spot of its puerilities. The church,
after having been docked of its steeple, is applied both ostensibly and
really, to the purpose for which the body of the pile was actually
erected, namely, a boat-house; the fort is demolished; and, without
indignation on the part of the spirits of the ancient Druids who
officiated at the circle upon the opposite hill, the mimic arrangement
of stones, with its _sanctum sanctorum_, has been swept away.

The present instance has been singled out, extravagant as it is,
because, unquestionably, this beautiful country has, in numerous other
places, suffered from the same spirit, though not clothed exactly in the
same form, nor active in an equal degree. It will be sufficient here to
utter a regret for the changes that have been made upon the principal
Island at Winandermere, and in its neighbourhood. What could be more
unfortunate than the taste that suggested the paring of the shores, and
surrounding with an embankment this spot of ground, the natural shape of
which was so beautiful! An artificial appearance has thus been given to
the whole, while infinite varieties of minute beauty have been
destroyed. Could not the margin of this noble island be given back to
Nature? Winds and waves work with a careless and graceful hand: and,
should they in some places carry away a portion of the soil, the
trifling loss would be amply compensated by the additional spirit,
dignity, and loveliness, which these agents and the other powers of
Nature would soon communicate to what was left behind. As to the
larch-plantations upon the main shore,--they who remember the original
appearance of the rocky steeps, scattered over with native hollies and
ash-trees, will be prepared to agree with what I shall have to say
hereafter upon plantations[60] in general.


[60] These are disappearing fast, under the management of the present
Proprietor, and native wood is resuming its place.

But, in truth, no one can now travel through the more frequented tracts,
without being offended, at almost every turn, by an introduction of
discordant objects, disturbing that peaceful harmony of form and colour,
which had been through a long lapse of ages most happily preserved.

All gross transgressions of this kind originate, doubtless, in a feeling
natural and honourable to the human mind, viz. the pleasure which it
receives from distinct ideas, and from the perception of order,
regularity, and contrivance. Now, unpractised minds receive these
impressions only from objects that are divided from each other by strong
lines of demarcation; hence the delight with which such minds are
smitten by formality and harsh contrast. But I would beg of those who
are eager to create the means of such gratification, first carefully to
study what already exists; and they will find, in a country so lavishly
gifted by Nature, an abundant variety of forms marked out with a
precision that will satisfy their desires. Moreover, a new habit of
pleasure will be formed opposite to this, arising out of the perception
of the fine gradations by which in Nature one thing passes away into
another, and the boundaries that constitute individuality disappear in
one instance only to be revived elsewhere under a more alluring form.
The bill of Dunmallet, at the foot of Ulswater, was once divided into
different portions, by avenues of fir-trees, with a green and almost
perpendicular lane descending down the steep hill through each
avenue;--contrast this quaint appearance with the image of the same hill
overgrown with self-planted wood,--each tree springing up in the
situation best suited to its kind, and with that shape which the
situation constrained or suffered it to take. What endless melting and
playing into each other of forms and colours does the one offer to a
mind at once attentive and active; and how insipid and lifeless,
compared with it, appear those parts of the former exhibition with
which a child, a peasant perhaps, or a citizen unfamiliar with natural
imagery, would have been most delighted!

The disfigurement which this country has undergone, has not, however,
proceeded wholly from the common feelings of human nature which have
been referred to as the primary sources of bad taste in rural imagery;
another cause must be added, that has chiefly shown itself in its effect
upon buildings. I mean a warping of the natural mind occasioned by a
consciousness that, this country being an object of general admiration,
every new house would be looked at and commented upon either for
approbation or censure. Hence all the deformity and ungracefulness that
ever pursue the steps of constraint or affectation. Persons, who in
Leicestershire or Northamptonshire would probably have built a modest
dwelling like those of their sensible neighbours, have been turned out
of their course; and, acting a part, no wonder if, having had little
experience, they act it ill. The craving for prospect, also, which is
immoderate, particularly in new settlers, has rendered it impossible
that buildings, whatever might have been their architecture, should in
most instances be ornamental to the landscape: rising as they do from
the summits of naked hills in staring contrast to the snugness and
privacy of the ancient houses.

No man is to be condemned for a desire to decorate his residence and
possessions; feeling a disposition to applaud such an endeavour, I would
show how the end may be best attained. The rule is simple; with respect
to grounds--work, where you can, in the spirit of Nature, with an
invisible hand of art. Planting, and a removal of wood, may thus, and
thus only, be carried on with good effect; and the like may be said of
building, if Antiquity, who may be styled the co-partner and sister of
Nature, be not denied the respect to which she is entitled. I have
already spoken of the beautiful forms of the ancient mansions of this
country, and of the happy manner in which they harmonise with the forms
of Nature. Why cannot such be taken as a model, and modern internal
convenience be confined within their external grace and dignity. Expense
to be avoided, or difficulties to be overcome, may prevent a close
adherence to this model; still, however, it might be followed to a
certain degree in the style of architecture and in the choice of
situation, if the thirst for prospect were mitigated by those
considerations of comfort, shelter, and convenience, which used to be
chiefly sought after. But should an aversion to old fashions
unfortunately exist, accompanied with a desire to transplant into the
cold and stormy North, the elegancies of a villa formed upon a model
taken from countries with a milder climate, I will adduce a passage from
an English poet, the divine Spenser, which will show in what manner such
a plan may be realised without injury to the native beauty of these
scenes.

    Into that forest farre they thence him led,
    Where was their dwelling in a pleasant glade
    With MOUNTAINS round about environed,
    And MIGHTY WOODS which did the valley shade,
    And like a stately theatre it made,
    Spreading itself into a spacious plaine;
    And in the midst a little river plaide
    Emongst the puny stones which seem'd to 'plaine
    With gentle murmure that his course they did restraine.

    Beside the same a dainty place there lay,
    Planted with mirtle trees and laurels green,
    In which the birds sang many a lovely lay
    Of God's high praise, and of their sweet loves teene,
    As it an earthly paradise had beene;
    In whose _enclosed shadow_ there was pight
    A fair pavillion, _scarcely to be seen_,
    The which was all within most richly dight,
    That greatest princes living it mote well delight.

Houses or mansions suited to a mountainous region, should be 'not
obvious, not obtrusive, but retired;' and the reasons for this rule,
though they have been little adverted to, are evident. Mountainous
countries, more frequently and forcibly than others, remind us of the
power of the elements, as manifested in winds, snows, and torrents, and
accordingly make the notion of exposure very unpleasing; while shelter
and comfort are in proportion necessary and acceptable. Far-winding
vallies difficult of access, and the feelings of simplicity habitually
connected with mountain retirements, prompt us to turn from ostentation
as a thing there eminently unnatural and out of place. A mansion, amid
such scenes, can never have sufficient dignity or interest to become
principal in the landscape, and to render the mountains, lakes, or
torrents, by which it may be surrounded, a subordinate part of the
view. It is, I grant, easy to conceive, that an ancient castellated
building, hanging over a precipice or raised upon an island, or the
peninsula of a lake, like that of Kilchurn Castle, upon Loch Awe, may
not want, whether deserted or inhabited, sufficient majesty to preside
for a moment in the spectator's thoughts over the high mountains among
which it is embosomed; but its titles are from antiquity--a power
readily submitted to upon occasion as the vicegerent of Nature: it is
respected, as having owed its existence to the necessities of things, as
a monument of security in times of disturbance and danger long passed
away,--as a record of the pomp and violence of passion, and a symbol of
the wisdom of law; it bears a countenance of authority, which is not
impaired by decay.

    Child of loud-throated War, the mountain stream
    Roars in thy hearing; but thy hour of rest
    Is come, and thou art silent in thy age!

To such honours a modern edifice can lay no claim; and the puny efforts
of elegance appear contemptible, when, in such situations, they are
obtruded in rivalship with the sublimities of Nature. But, towards the
verge of a district like this of which we are treating, where the
mountains subside into hills of moderate elevation, or in an undulating
or flat country, a gentleman's mansion may, with propriety, become a
principal feature in the landscape; and, itself being a work of art,
works and traces of artificial ornament may, without censure, be
extended around it, as they will be referred to the common centre, the
house; the right of which to impress within certain limits a character
of obvious ornament will not be denied, where no commanding forms of
Nature dispute it, or set it aside. Now, to a want of the perception of
this difference, and to the causes before assigned, may chiefly be
attributed the disfigurement which the Country of the Lakes has
undergone, from persons who may have built, demolished, and planted,
with full confidence, that every change and addition was or would become
an improvement.

The principle that ought to determine the position, apparent size, and
architecture of a house, viz. that it should be so constructed, and (if
large) so much of it hidden, as to admit of its being gently
incorporated into the scenery of Nature--should also determine its
colour. Sir Joshua Reynolds used to say, 'If you would fix upon the best
colour for your house, turn up a stone, or pluck up a handful of grass
by the roots, and see what is the colour of the soil where the house is
to stand, and let that be your choice.' Of course, this precept given in
conversation, could not have been meant to be taken literally. For
example, in Low Furness, where the soil, from its strong impregnation
with iron, is universally of a deep red, if this rule were strictly
followed, the house also must be of a glaring red; in other places it
must be of a sullen black; which would only be adding annoyance to
annoyance. The rule, however, as a general guide, is good; and, in
agricultural districts, where large tracts of soil are laid bare by the
plough, particularly if (the face of the country being undulating) they
are held up to view, this rule, though not to be implicitly adhered to,
should never be lost sight of;--the colour of the house ought, if
possible, to have a cast or shade of the colour of the soil. The
principle is, that the house must harmonise with the surrounding
landscape: accordingly, in mountainous countries, with still more
confidence may it be said, 'look at the rocks and those parts of the
mountains where the soil is visible, and they will furnish a safe
direction.' Nevertheless, it will often happen that the rocks may bear
so large a proportion to the rest of the landscape, and may be of such a
tone of colour, that the rule may not admit, even here, of being
implicitly followed. For instance, the chief defect in the colouring of
the Country of the Lakes (which is most strongly felt in the summer
season) is an over-prevalence of a bluish tint, which the green of the
herbage, the fern, and the woods, does not sufficiently counteract. If a
house, therefore, should stand where this defect prevails, I have no
hesitation in saying, that the colour of the neighbouring rocks would
not be the best that could be chosen. A tint ought to be introduced
approaching nearer to those which, in the technical language of
painters, are called _warm_: this, if happily selected, would not
disturb, but would animate the landscape. How often do we see this
exemplified upon a small scale by the native cottages, in cases where
the glare of white-wash has been subdued by time and enriched by
weather-stains! No harshness is then seen; but one of these cottages,
thus coloured, will often form a central point to a landscape by which
the whole shall be connected, and an influence of pleasure diffused
over all the objects that compose the picture. But where the cold blue
tint of the rocks is enriched by the iron tinge, the colour cannot be
too closely imitated; and it will be produced of itself by the stones
hewn from the adjoining quarry, and by the mortar, which may be tempered
with the most gravelly part of the soil. The pure blue gravel, from the
bed of the river, is, however, more suitable to the mason's purpose, who
will probably insist also that the house must be covered with
rough-cast, otherwise it cannot be kept dry; if this advice be taken,
the builder of taste will set about contriving such means as may enable
him to come the nearest to the effect aimed at.

The supposed necessity of rough-cast to keep out rain in houses not
built of hewn stone or brick, has tended greatly to injure English
landscape, and the neighbourhood of these Lakes especially, by
furnishing such apt occasion for whitening buildings. That white should
be a favourite colour for rural residences is natural for many reasons.
The mere aspect of cleanliness and neatness thus given, not only to an
individual house, but, where the practice is general, to the whole face
of the country, produces moral associations so powerful, that, in many
minds, they take place of all others. But what has already been said
upon the subject of cottages, must have convinced men of feeling and
imagination, that a human dwelling of the humblest class may be rendered
more deeply interesting to the affections, and far more pleasing to the
eye, by other influences, than a sprightly tone of colour spread over
its outside. I do not, however, mean to deny, that a small white
building, embowered in trees, may, in some situations, be a delightful
and animating object--in no way injurious to the landscape; but this
only where it sparkles from the midst of a thick shade, and in rare and
solitary instances; especially if the country be itself rich and
pleasing, and abound with grand forms. On the sides of bleak and
desolate moors, we are indeed thankful for the sight of white cottages
and white houses plentifully scattered, where, without these, perhaps
every thing would be cheerless: this is said, however, with hesitation,
and with a wilful sacrifice of some higher enjoyments. But I have
certainly seen such buildings glittering at sun-rise, and in wandering
lights, with no common pleasure. The continental traveller also will
remember, that the convents hanging from the rocks of the Rhine, the
Rhone, the Danube, or among the Appenines, or the mountains of Spain,
are not looked at with less complacency when, as is often the case, they
happen to be of a brilliant white. But this is perhaps owing, in no
small degree, to the contrast of that lively colour with the gloom of
monastic life, and to the general want of rural residences of smiling
and attractive appearance, in those countries.

The objections to white, as a colour, in large spots or masses in
landscape, especially in a mountainous country, are insurmountable. In
Nature, pure white is scarcely ever found but in small objects, such as
flowers: or in those which are transitory, as the clouds, foam of
rivers, and snow. Mr. Gilpin, who notices this, has also recorded the
just remark of Mr. Locke, of N----, that white destroys the _gradations_
of distance; and, therefore, an object of pure white can scarcely ever
be managed with good effect in landscape-painting. Five or six white
houses, scattered over a valley, by their obtrusiveness, dot the
surface, and divide it into triangles, or other mathematical figures,
haunting the eye, and disturbing that repose which might otherwise be
perfect. I have seen a single white house materially impair the majesty
of a mountain; cutting away, by a harsh separation, the whole of its
base, below the point on which the house stood. Thus was the apparent
size of the mountain reduced, not by the interposition of another object
in a manner to call forth the imagination, which will give more than the
eye loses; but what had been abstracted in this case was left visible;
and the mountain appeared to take its beginning, or to rise, from the
line of the house, instead of its own natural base. But, if I may
express my own individual feeling, it is after sunset, at the coming on
of twilight, that white objects are most to be complained of. The
solemnity and quietness of Nature at that time are always marred, and
often destroyed by them. When the ground is covered with snow, they are
of course inoffensive; and in moonshine they are always pleasing--it is
a tone of light with which they accord: and the dimness of the scene is
enlivened by an object at once conspicuous and cheerful. I will conclude
this subject with noticing, that the cold, slaty colour, which many
persons, who have heard the white condemned, have adopted in its stead,
must be disapproved of for the reason already given. The flaring yellow
runs into the opposite extreme, and is still more censurable. Upon the
whole, the safest colour, for general use, is something between a cream
and a dust-colour, commonly called stone colour;--there are, among the
Lakes, examples of this that need not be pointed out.[61]

[61] A proper colouring of houses is now becoming general. It is best
that the colouring material should be mixed with the rough-cast, and not
laid on as a _wash_ afterwards.

The principle taken as our guide, viz. that the house should be so
formed, and of such apparent size and colour, as to admit of its being
gently incorporated with the works of Nature, should also be applied to
the management of the grounds and plantations, and is here more urgently
needed; for it is from abuses in this department, far more even than
from the introduction of exotics in architecture (if the phrase may be
used), that this country has suffered. Larch and fir plantations have
been spread, not merely with a view to profit, but in many instances for
the sake of ornament. To those who plant for profit, and are thrusting
every other tree out of the way, to make room for their favourite, the
larch, I would utter first a regret, that they should have selected
these lovely vales for their vegetable manufactory, when there is so
much barren and irreclaimable land in the neighbouring moors, and in
other parts of the island, which might have been had for this purpose at
a far cheaper rate. And I will also beg leave to represent to them, that
they ought not to be carried away by flattering promises from the speedy
growth of this tree; because in rich soils and sheltered situations, the
wood, though it thrives fast, is full of sap, and of little value; and
is, likewise, very subject to ravage from the attacks of insects, and
from blight. Accordingly, in Scotland, where planting is much better
understood, and carried on upon an incomparably larger scale than among
us, good soil and sheltered situations are appropriated to the oak, the
ash, and other deciduous trees; and the larch is now generally confined
to barren and exposed ground. There the plant, which is a hardy one, is
of slower growth; much less liable to injury; and the timber is of
better quality. But the circumstances of many permit, and their taste
leads them, to plant with little regard to profit; and there are others,
less wealthy, who have such a lively feeling of the native beauty of
these scenes, that they are laudably not unwilling to make some
sacrifices to heighten it. Both these classes of persons, I would
entreat to inquire of themselves wherein that beauty which they admire
consists. They would then see that, after the feeling has been gratified
that prompts us to gather round our dwelling a few flowers and shrubs,
which from the circumstance of their not being native, may, by their
very looks, remind us that they owe their existence to our hands, and
their prosperity to our care; they will see that, after this natural
desire has been provided for, the course of all beyond has been
predetermined by the spirit of the place. Before I proceed, I will
remind those who are not satisfied with the restraint thus laid upon
them, that they are liable to a charge of inconsistency, when they are
so eager to change the face of that country, whose native attractions,
by the act of erecting their habitations in it, they have so
emphatically acknowledged. And surely there is not a single spot that
would not have, if well managed, sufficient dignity to support itself,
unaided by the productions of other climates, or by elaborate
decorations which might be becoming elsewhere.

Having adverted to the feelings that justify the introduction of a few
exotic plants, provided they be confined almost to the doors of the
house, we may add, that a transition should be contrived, without
abruptness, from these foreigners to the rest of the shrubs, which ought
to be of the kinds scattered by Nature, through the woods--holly, broom,
wild-rose, elder, dogberry, white and black thorn, &c.--either these
only, or such as are carefully selected in consequence of their being
united in form, and harmonising in colour with them, especially with
respect to colour, when the tints are most diversified, as in autumn and
spring. The various sorts of fruit-and-blossom-bearing trees usually
found in orchards, to which may be added those of the woods,--namely,
the wilding, black cherry tree, and wild cluster-cherry (here called
heck-berry)--may be happily admitted as an intermediate link between the
shrubs and the forest trees; which last ought almost entirely to be such
as are natives of the country. Of the birch, one of the most beautiful
of the native trees, it may be noticed, that, in dry and rocky
situations, it outstrips even the larch, which many persons are tempted
to plant merely on account of the speed of its growth. The Scotch fir is
less attractive during its youth than any other plant; but, when full
grown, if it has had room to spread out its arms, it becomes a noble
tree; and, by those who are disinterested enough to plant for posterity,
it may be placed along with the sycamore near the house; for, from their
massiveness, both these trees unite well with buildings, and in some
situations with rocks also; having, in their forms and apparent
substances, the effect of something intermediate betwixt the
immoveableness and solidity of stone, and the spray and foliage of the
lighter trees. If these general rules be just, what shall we say to
whole acres of artificial shrubbery and exotic trees among rocks and
dashing torrents, with their own wild wood in sight--where we have the
whole contents of the nurseryman's catalogue jumbled together--colour at
war with colour, and form with form?--among the most peaceful subjects
of Nature's kingdom, everywhere discord, distraction, and bewilderment!
But this deformity, bad as it is, is not so obtrusive as the small
patches and large tracts of larch-plantations that are overrunning the
hill sides. To justify our condemnation of these, let us again recur to
Nature. The process, by which she forms woods and forests, is as
follows. Seeds are scattered indiscriminately by winds, brought by
waters, and dropped by birds. They perish, or produce, according as the
soil and situation upon which they fall are suited to them: and under
the same dependence, the seedling or the sucker, if not cropped by
animals, (which Nature is often careful to prevent by fencing it about
with brambles or other prickly shrubs) thrives, and the tree grows,
sometimes single, taking its own shape without constraint, but for the
most part compelled to conform itself to some law imposed upon it by its
neighbours. From low and sheltered places, vegetation travels upwards to
the more exposed; and the young plants are protected, and to a certain
degree fashioned, by those that have preceded them. The continuous mass
of foliage which would be thus produced, is broken by rocks, or by
glades or open places, where the browzing of animals has prevented the
growth of wood. As vegetation ascends, the winds begin also to bear
their part in moulding the forms of the trees; but, thus mutually
protected, trees, though not of the hardiest kind, are enabled to climb
high up the mountains. Gradually, however, by the quality of the ground,
and by increasing exposure, a stop is put to their ascent; the hardy
trees only are left: those also, by little and little, give way--and a
wild and irregular boundary is established, graceful in its outline,
and never contemplated without some feeling, more or less distinct, of
the powers of Nature by which it is imposed.

Contrast the liberty that encourages, and the law that limits, this
joint work of Nature and Time, with the disheartening necessities,
restrictions, and disadvantages, under which the artificial planter must
proceed, even he whom long observation and fine feeling have best
qualified for his task. In the first place his trees, however well
chosen and adapted to their several situations, must generally start all
at the same time; and this necessity would of itself prevent that fine
connection of parts, that sympathy and organisation, if I may so express
myself, which pervades the whole of a natural wood, and appears to the
eye in its single trees, its masses of foliage, and their various
colours, when they are held up to view on the side of a mountain; or
when, spread over a valley, they are looked down upon from an eminence.
It is therefore impossible, under any circumstances, for the artificial
planter to rival the beauty of Nature. But a moment's thought will show
that, if ten thousand of this spiky tree, the larch, are stuck in at
once upon the side of a hill, they can grow up into nothing but
deformity; that, while they are suffered to stand, we shall look in vain
for any of those appearances which are the chief sources of beauty in a
natural wood.

It must be acknowledged that the larch, till it has outgrown the size of
a shrub, shows, when looked at singly, some elegance in form and
appearance, especially in spring, decorated, as it then is, by the pink
tassels of its blossoms; but, as a tree, it is less than any other
pleasing: its branches (for _boughs_ it has none) have no variety in the
youth of the tree, and little dignity, even when it attains its full
growth: _leaves_ it cannot be said to have, consequently neither affords
shade nor shelter. In spring the larch becomes green long before the
native trees; and its green is so peculiar and vivid, that, finding
nothing to harmonise with it, wherever it comes forth, a disagreeable
speck is produced. In summer, when all other trees are in their pride,
it is of a dingy, lifeless hue; in autumn of a spiritless unvaried
yellow, and in winter it is still more lamentably distinguished from
every other deciduous tree of the forest, for they seem only to sleep,
but the larch appears absolutely dead. If an attempt be made to mingle
thickets, or a certain proportion of other forest-trees, with the
larch, its horizontal branches intolerantly cut them down as with a
scythe, or force them to spindle up to keep pace with it. The
terminating spike renders it impossible that the several trees, where
planted in numbers, should ever blend together so as to form a mass or
masses of wood. Add thousands to tens of thousands, and the appearance
is still the same--a collection of separate individual trees,
obstinately presenting themselves as such; and which, from whatever
point they are looked at, if but seen, may be counted upon the fingers.
Sunshine, or shadow, has little power to adorn the surface of such a
wood; and the trees not carrying up their heads, the wind raises among
them no majestic undulations. It is indeed true, that, in countries
where the larch is a native, and where, without interruption, it may
sweep from valley to valley, and from hill to hill, a sublime image may
be produced by such a forest, in the same manner as by one composed of
any other single tree, to the spreading of which no limits can be
assigned. For sublimity will never be wanting, where the sense of
innumerable multitude is lost in, and alternates with, that of intense
unity; and to the ready perception of this effect, similarity and almost
identity of individual form and monotony of colour contribute. But this
feeling is confined to the native immeasurable forest; no artificial
plantation can give it.

The foregoing observations will, I hope, (as nothing has been condemned
or recommended without a substantial reason) have some influence upon
those who plant for ornament merely. To such as plant for profit, I have
already spoken. Let me then entreat that the native deciduous trees may
be left in complete possession of the lower ground; and that plantations
of larch, if introduced at all, may be confined to the highest and most
barren tracts. Interposition of rocks would there break the dreary
uniformity of which we have been complaining; and the winds would take
hold of the trees, and imprint upon their shapes a wildness congenial to
their situation.

Having determined what kinds of trees must be wholly rejected, or at
least very sparingly used, by those who are unwilling to disfigure the
country; and having shown what kinds ought to be chosen; I should have
given, if my limits had not already been overstepped, a few practical
rules for the manner in which trees ought to be disposed in planting.
But to this subject I should attach little importance, if I could
succeed in banishing such trees as introduce deformity, and could
prevail upon the proprietor to confine himself, either to those found in
the native woods, or to such as accord with them. This is, indeed, the
main point; for, much as these scenes have been injured by what has been
taken from them--buildings, trees, and woods, either through negligence,
necessity, avarice, or caprice--it is not the removals, but the harsh
_additions_ that have been made, which are the worst grievance--a
standing and unavoidable annoyance. Often have I felt this distinction,
with mingled satisfaction and regret; for, if no positive deformity or
discordance be substituted or superinduced, such is the benignity of
Nature, that, take away from her beauty after beauty, and ornament after
ornament, her appearance cannot be marred--the scars, if any be left,
will gradually disappear before a healing spirit; and what remains will
still be soothing and pleasing.--

              Many hearts deplored
    The fate of those old trees; and oft with pain
    The traveller at this day will stop and gaze
    On wrongs which Nature scarcely seems to heed:
    For sheltered places, bosoms, nooks, and bays,
    And the pure mountains, and the gentle Tweed,
    And the green silent pastures, yet remain.

There are few ancient woods left in this part of England upon which such
indiscriminate ravage as is here 'deplored,' could now be committed.
But, out of the numerous copses, fine woods might in time be raised,
probably without sacrifice of profit, by leaving, at the periodical
fellings, a due proportion of the healthiest trees to grow up into
timber.--This plan has fortunately, in many instances, been adopted; and
they, who have set the example, are entitled to the thanks of all
persons of taste. As to the management of planting with reasonable
attention to ornament, let the images of Nature be your guide, and the
whole secret lurks in a few words; thickets or underwoods--single
trees--trees clustered or in groups--groves--unbroken woods, but with
varied masses of foliage--glades--invisible or winding boundaries--in
rocky districts, a seemly proportion of rock left wholly bare, and other
parts half hidden--disagreeable objects concealed, and formal lines
broken--trees climbing up to the horizon, and, in some places, ascending
from its sharp edge, in which they are rooted, with the whole body of
the tree appearing to stand in the clear sky--in other parts, woods
surmounted by rocks utterly bare and naked, which add to the sense of
height, as if vegetation could not thither be carried, and impress a
feeling of duration, power of resistance, and security from change!

The author has been induced to speak thus at length, by a wish to
preserve the native beauty of this delightful district, because still
further changes in its appearance must inevitably follow, from the
change of inhabitants and owners which is rapidly taking place.--About
the same time that strangers began to be attracted to the country, and
to feel a desire to settle in it, the difficulty, that would have stood
in the way of their procuring situations, was lessened by an unfortunate
alteration in the circumstances of the native peasantry, proceeding from
a cause which then began to operate, and is now felt in every house. The
family of each man, whether _estatesman_ or farmer, formerly had a
twofold support; first, the produce of his lands and flocks; and,
secondly, the profit drawn from the employment of the women and
children, as manufacturers; spinning their own wool in their own houses
(work chiefly done in the winter season), and carrying it to market for
sale. Hence, however numerous the children, the income of the family
kept pace with its increase. But, by the invention and universal
application of machinery, this second resource has been cut off; the
gains being so far reduced, as not to be sought after but by a few aged
persons disabled from other employment. Doubtless, the invention of
machinery has not been to these people a pure loss; for the profits
arising from home-manufactures operated as a strong temptation to choose
that mode of labour in neglect of husbandry. They also participate in
the general benefit which the island has derived from the increased
value of the produce of land, brought about by the establishment of
manufactories, and in the consequent quickening of agricultural
industry. But this is far from making them amends; and now that
home-manufactures are nearly done away, though the women and children
might, at many seasons of the year, employ themselves with advantage in
the fields beyond what they are accustomed to do, yet still all possible
exertion in this way cannot be rationally expected from persons whose
agricultural knowledge is so confined, and, above all, where there must
necessarily be so small a capital. The consequence, then, is--that
proprietors and farmers being no longer able to maintain themselves upon
small farms, several are united in one, and the buildings go to decay,
or are destroyed; and that the lands of the _estatesmen_ being
mortgaged, and the owners constrained to part with them, they fall into
the hands of wealthy purchasers, who in like manner unite and
consolidate; and, if they wish to become residents, erect new mansions
out of the ruins of the ancient cottages, whose little enclosures, with
all the wild graces that grew out of them, disappear. The feudal tenure
under which the estates are held has indeed done something towards
checking this influx of new settlers; but so strong is the inclination,
that these galling restraints are endured; and it is probable, that in a
few years the country on the margin of the Lakes will fall almost
entirely into the possession of gentry, either strangers or natives. It
is then much to be wished, that a better taste should prevail among
these new proprietors; and, as they cannot be expected to leave things
to themselves, that skill and knowledge should prevent unnecessary
deviations from that path of simplicity and beauty along which, without
design and unconsciously, their humble predecessors have moved. In this
wish the author will be joined by persons of pure taste throughout the
whole island, who, by their visits (often repeated) to the Lakes in the
North of England, testify that they deem the district a sort of national
property, in which every man has a right and interest who has an eye to
perceive and a heart to enjoy.




MISCELLANEOUS OBSERVATIONS.

MR. WEST, in his well-known Guide to the Lakes, recommends, as the best
season for visiting this country, the interval from the beginning of
June to the end of August; and, the two latter months being a time of
vacation and leisure, it is almost exclusively in these that strangers
resort hither. But that season is by no means the best; the colouring of
the mountains and woods, unless where they are diversified by rocks, is
of too unvaried a green; and, as a large portion of the vallies is
allotted to hay-grass, some want of variety is found there also. The
meadows, however, are sufficiently enlivened after hay-making begins,
which is much later than in the southern part of the island. A stronger
objection is rainy weather, setting in sometimes at this period with a
vigour, and continuing with a perseverance, that may remind the
disappointed and dejected traveller of those deluges of rain which fall
among the Abyssinian mountains, for the annual supply of the Nile. The
months of September and October (particularly October) are generally
attended with much finer weather; and the scenery is then, beyond
comparison, more diversified, more splendid, and beautiful; but, on the
other hand, short days prevent long excursions, and sharp and chill
gales are unfavourable to parties of pleasure out of doors.
Nevertheless, to the sincere admirer of Nature, who is in good health
and spirits, and at liberty to make a choice, the six weeks following
the 1st of September may be recommended in preference to July and
August. For there is no inconvenience arising from the season which, to
such a person, would not be amply compensated by the _autumnal_
appearance of any of the more retired vallies, into which discordant
plantations and unsuitable buildings have not yet found entrance.--In
such spots, at this season, there is an admirable compass and proportion
of natural harmony in colour, through the whole scale of objects; in the
tender green of the after-grass upon the meadows, interspersed with
islands of grey or mossy rock, crowned by shrubs and trees; in the
irregular inclosures of standing corn, or stubble-fields, in like manner
broken; in the mountain-sides glowing with fern of divers colours; in
the calm blue lakes and river-pools; and in the foliage of the trees,
through all the tints of autumn,--from the pale and brilliant yellow of
the birch and ash, to the deep greens of the unfaded oak and alder, and
of the ivy upon the rocks, upon the trees, and the cottages. Yet, as
most travellers are either stinted, or stint themselves, for time, the
space between the middle or last week in May, and the middle or last
week of June, may be pointed out as affording the best combination of
long days, fine weather, and variety of impressions. Few of the native
trees are then in full leaf; but, for whatever maybe wanting in depth of
shade, more than an equivalent will be found in the diversity of
foliage, in the blossoms of the fruit-and-berry-bearing trees which
abound in the woods, and in the golden flowers of the broom and other
shrubs, with which many of the copses are interveined. In those woods,
also, and on those mountain-sides which have a northern aspect, and in
the deep dells, many of the spring-flowers still linger; while the open
and sunny places are stocked with the flowers of the approaching summer.
And, besides, is not an exquisite pleasure still untasted by him who has
not heard the choir of linnets and thrushes chaunting their love-songs
in the copses, woods, and hedge-rows of a mountainous country; safe from
the birds of prey, which build in the inaccessible crags, and are at all
hours seen or heard wheeling about in the air? The number of these
formidable creatures is probably the cause, why, in the _narrow_
vallies, there are no skylarks; as the destroyer would be enabled to
dart upon them from the near and surrounding crags, before they could
descend to their ground-nests for protection. It is not often that the
nightingale resorts to these vales; but almost all the other tribes of
our English warblers are numerous; and their notes, when listened to by
the side of broad still waters, or when heard in unison with the
murmuring of mountain-brooks, have the compass of their power enlarged
accordingly. There is also an imaginative influence in the voice of the
cuckoo, when that voice has taken possession of a deep mountain valley,
very different from any thing which can be excited by the same sound in
a flat country. Nor must a circumstance be omitted, which here renders
the close of spring especially interesting; I mean the practice of
bringing down the ewes from the mountains to yean in the vallies and
enclosed grounds. The herbage being thus cropped as it springs, _that_
first tender emerald green of the season, which would otherwise have
lasted little more than a fortnight, is prolonged in the pastures and
meadows for many weeks: while they are farther enlivened by the
multitude of lambs bleating and skipping about. These sportive
creatures, as they gather strength, are turned out upon the open
mountains, and with their slender limbs, their snow-white colour, and
their wild and light motions, beautifully accord or contrast with the
rocks and lawns, upon which they must now begin to seek their food. And
last, but not least, at this time the traveller will be sure of room and
comfortable accommodation, even in the smaller inns. I am aware that few
of those who may be inclined to profit by this recommendation will be
able to do so, as the time and manner of an excursion of this kind are
mostly regulated by circumstances which prevent an entire freedom of
choice. It will therefore be more pleasant to observe, that, though the
months of July and August are liable to many objections, yet it often
happens that the weather, at this time, is not more wet and stormy than
they, who are really capable of enjoying the sublime forms of Nature in
their utmost sublimity, would desire. For no traveller, provided he be
in good health, and with any command of time, would have a just
privilege to visit such scenes, if he could grudge the price of a little
confinement among them, or interruption in his journey, for the sight or
sound of a storm coming on or clearing away. Insensible must he be who
would not congratulate himself upon the bold bursts of sunshine, the
descending vapours, wandering lights and shadows, and the invigorated
torrents and waterfalls, with which broken weather, in a mountainous
region, is accompanied. At such a time there is no cause to complain,
either of the monotony of midsummer colouring, or the glaring atmosphere
of long, cloudless, and hot days.

Thus far concerning the respective advantages and disadvantages of the
different seasons for visiting this country. As to the order in which
objects are best seen--a lake being composed of water flowing from
higher grounds, and expanding itself till its receptacle is filled to
the brim,--it follows, that it will appear to most advantage when
approached from its outlet, especially if the lake be in a mountainous
country; for, by this way of approach, the traveller faces the grander
features of the scene, and is gradually conducted into its most sublime
recesses. Now, every one knows, that from amenity and beauty the
transition to sublimity is easy and favourable; but the reverse is not
so; for, after the faculties have been elevated, they are indisposed to
humbler excitement.[62]

[62] The only instances to which the foregoing observations do not
apply, are Derwent-water and Lowes-water. Derwent is distinguished from
all the other Lakes by being _surrounded_ with sublimity: the fantastic
mountains of Borrowdale to the south, the solitary majesty of Skiddaw to
the north, the bold steeps of Wallow-crag and Lodore to the east, and to
the west the clustering mountains of Newlands. Lowes-water is tame at
the head, but towards its outlet has a magnificent assemblage of
mountains. Yet, as far as respects the formation of such receptacles,
the general observation holds good: neither Derwent nor Lowes-water
derive any supplies from the streams of those mountains that dignify the
landscape towards the outlets.

It is not likely that a mountain will be ascended without
disappointment, if a wide range of prospect be the object, unless either
the summit be reached before sun-rise, or the visitant remain there
until the time of sun-set, and afterwards. The precipitous sides of the
mountain, and the neighbouring summits, may be seen with effect under
any atmosphere which allows them to be seen at all; but _he_ is the most
fortunate adventurer, who chances to be involved in vapours which open
and let in an extent of country partially, or, dispersing suddenly,
reveal the whole region from centre to circumference.

A stranger to a mountainous country may not be aware that his walk in
the early morning ought to be taken on the eastern side of the vale,
otherwise he will lose the morning light, first touching the tops and
thence creeping down the sides of the opposite hills, as the sun
ascends, or he may go to some central eminence, commanding both the
shadows from the eastern, and the lights upon the western mountains.
But, if the horizon line in the east be low, the western side may be
taken for the sake of the reflections, upon the water, of light from the
rising sun. In the evening, for like reasons, the contrary course should
be taken.

After all, it is upon the _mind_ which a traveller brings along with him
that his acquisitions, whether of pleasure or profit, must principally
depend.--May I be allowed a few words on this subject?

Nothing is more injurious to genuine feeling than the practice of
hastily and ungraciously depreciating the face of one country by
comparing it with that of another. True it is Qui _bene_ distinguit bene
_docet_; yet fastidiousness is a wretched travelling companion; and the
best guide to which, in matters of taste, we can entrust ourselves, is a
disposition to be pleased. For example, if a traveller be among the
Alps, let him surrender up his mind to the fury of the gigantic
torrents, and take delight in the contemplation of their almost
irresistible violence, without complaining of the monotony of their
foaming course, or being disgusted with the muddiness of the
water--apparent even where it is violently agitated. In Cumberland and
Westmoreland, let not the comparative weakness of the streams prevent
him from sympathising with such impetuosity as they possess; and, making
the most of the present objects, let him, as he justly may do, observe
with admiration the unrivalled brilliancy of the water, and that variety
of motion, mood, and character, that arises out of the want of those
resources by which the power of the streams in the Alps is
supported.--Again, with respect to the mountains; though these are
comparatively of diminutive size, though there is little of perpetual
snow, and no voice of summer-avalanches is heard among them; and though
traces left by the ravage of the elements are here comparatively rare
and unimpressive, yet out of this very deficiency proceeds a sense of
stability and permanence that is, to many minds, more grateful--

    While the hoarse rushes to the sweeping breeze
    Sigh forth their ancient melodies.

Among the Alps are few places that do not preclude this feeling of
tranquil sublimity. Havoc, and ruin, and desolation, and encroachment,
are everywhere more or less obtruded; and it is difficult,
notwithstanding the naked loftiness of the _pikes_, and the snow-capped
summits of the _mounts_, to escape from the depressing sensation, that
the whole are in a rapid process of dissolution; and, were it not that
the destructive agency must abate as the heights diminish, would, in
time to come, be levelled with the plains. Nevertheless, I would relish
to the utmost the demonstrations of every species of power at work to
effect such changes.

From these general views let us descend a moment to detail. A stranger
to mountain imagery naturally on his first arrival looks out for
sublimity in every object that admits of it; and is almost always
disappointed. For this disappointment there exists, I believe, no
general preventive; nor is it desirable that there should. But with
regard to one class of objects, there is a point in which injurious
expectations may be easily corrected. It is generally supposed that
waterfalls are scarcely worth being looked at except after much rain,
and that, the more swoln the stream, the more fortunate the spectator;
but this however is true only of large cataracts with sublime
accompaniments; and not even of these without some drawbacks. In other
instances, what becomes, at such a time, of that sense of refreshing
coolness which can only be felt in dry and sunny weather, when the
rocks, herbs, and flowers glisten with moisture diffused by the breath
of the precipitous water? But, considering these things as objects of
sight only, it may be observed that the principal charm of the smaller
waterfalls or cascades consists in certain proportions of form and
affinities of colour, among the component parts of the scene; and in the
contrast maintained between the falling water and that which is
apparently at rest, or rather settling gradually into quiet in the pool
below. The beauty of such a scene, where there is naturally so much
agitation, is also heightened, in a peculiar manner, by the
_glimmering_, and, towards the verge of the pool, by the _steady_,
reflection of the surrounding images. Now, all those delicate
distinctions are destroyed by heavy floods, and the whole stream rushes
along in foam and tumultuous confusion. A happy proportion of component
parts is indeed noticeable among the landscapes of the North of England;
and, in this characteristic essential to a perfect picture, they surpass
the scenes of Scotland, and, in a still greater degree, those of
Switzerland.

As a resident among the Lakes, I frequently hear the scenery of this
country compared with that of the Alps; and therefore a few words shall
be added to what has been incidentally said upon that subject.

If we could recall, to this region of lakes, the native pine-forests,
with which many hundred years ago a large portion of the heights was
covered, then, during spring and autumn, it might frequently, with much
propriety, be compared to Switzerland,--the elements of the landscape
would be the same--one country representing the other in miniature.
Towns, villages, churches, rural seats, bridges and roads: green
meadows and arable grounds, with their various produce, and deciduous
woods of diversified foliage which occupy the vales and lower regions of
the mountains, would, as in Switzerland, be divided by dark forests from
ridges and round-topped heights covered with snow, and from pikes and
sharp declivities imperfectly arrayed in the same glittering mantle: and
the resemblance would be still more perfect on those days when vapours,
resting upon, and floating around the summits, leave the elevation of
the mountains less dependent upon the eye than on the imagination. But
the pine-forests have wholly disappeared; and only during late spring
and early autumn is realised here that assemblage of the imagery of
different seasons, which is exhibited through the whole summer among the
Alps,--winter in the distance,--and warmth, leafy woods, verdure and
fertility at hand, and widely diffused.

Striking, then, from among the permanent materials of the landscape,
that stage of vegetation which is occupied by pine-forests, and, above
that, the perennial snows, we have mountains, the highest of which
little exceed 3000 feet, while some of the Alps do not fall short of
14,000 or 15,000, and 8000 or 10,000 is not an uncommon elevation. Our
tracts of wood and water are almost diminutive in comparison; therefore,
as far as sublimity is dependent upon absolute bulk and height, and
atmospherical influences in connection with these, it is obvious, that
there can be no rivalship. But a short residence among the British
Mountains will furnish abundant proof, that, after a certain point of
elevation, viz. that which allows of compact and fleecy clouds settling
upon, or sweeping over, the summits, the sense of sublimity depends more
upon form and relation of objects to each other than upon their actual
magnitude; and that an elevation of 3000 feet is sufficient to call
forth in a most impressive degree the creative, and magnifying, and
softening powers of the atmosphere. Hence, on the score even of
sublimity, the superiority of the Alps is by no means so great as might
hastily be inferred;--and, as to the _beauty_ of the lower regions of
the Swiss Mountains, it is noticeable--that, as they are all regularly
mown, their surface has nothing of that mellow tone and variety of hues
by which mountain turf, that is never touched by the scythe, is
distinguished. On the smooth and steep slopes of the Swiss hills, these
plots of verdure do indeed agreeably unite their colour with that of the
deciduous trees, or make a lively contrast with the dark green
pine-groves that define them, and among which they run in endless
variety of shapes--but this is most pleasing _at first sight_; the
permanent gratification of the eye requires finer gradations of tone,
and a more delicate blending of hues into each other. Besides, it is
only in spring and late autumn that cattle animate by their presence the
Swiss lawns; and, though the pastures of the higher regions where they
feed during the summer are left in their natural state of flowery
herbage, those pastures are so remote, that their texture and colour are
of no consequence in the composition of any picture in which a lake of
the Vales is a feature. Yet in those lofty regions, how vegetation is
invigorated by the genial climate of that country! Among the luxuriant
flowers there met with, groves, or forests, if I may so call them, of
Monks-hood are frequently seen; the plant of deep, rich blue, and as
tall as in our gardens; and this at an elevation where, in Cumberland,
Icelandic moss would only be found, or the stony summits be utterly
bare.

We have, then, for the colouring of Switzerland, _principally_ a vivid
green herbage, black woods, and dazzling snows, presented in masses with
a grandeur to which no one can be insensible; but not often graduated by
Nature into soothing harmony, and so ill suited to the pencil, that
though abundance of good subjects may be there found, they are not such
as can be deemed _characteristic_ of the country; nor is this unfitness
confined to colour: the forms of the mountains, though many of them in
some points of view the noblest that can be conceived, are apt to run
into spikes and needles, and present a jagged outline which has a mean
effect, transferred to canvass. This must have been felt by the ancient
masters; for, if I am not mistaken, they have not left a single
landscape, the materials of which are taken from the _peculiar_ features
of the Alps; yet Titian passed his life almost in their neighbourhood;
the Poussins and Claude must have been well acquainted with their
aspects; and several admirable painters, as Tibaldi and Luino, were born
among the Italian Alps. A few experiments have lately been made by
Englishmen, but they only prove that courage, skill, and judgment, may
surmount any obstacles; and it may be safely affirmed, that they who
have done best in this bold adventure, will be the least likely to
repeat the attempt. But, though our scenes are better suited to painting
than those of the Alps, I should be sorry to contemplate either country
in reference to that art, further than as its fitness or unfitness for
the pencil renders it more or less pleasing to the eye of the spectator,
who has learned to observe and feel, chiefly from Nature herself.

Deeming the points in which Alpine imagery is superior to British too
obvious to be insisted upon, I will observe that the deciduous woods,
though in many places unapproachable by the axe, and triumphing in the
pomp and prodigality of Nature, have, in general,[63] neither the
variety nor beauty which would exist in those of the mountains of
Britain, if left to themselves. Magnificent walnut-trees grow upon the
plains of Switzerland; and fine trees, of that species, are found
scattered over the hill-sides: birches also grow here and there in
luxuriant beauty; but neither these, nor oaks, are ever a prevailing
tree, nor can even be said to be common; and the oaks, as far as I had
an opportunity of observing, are greatly inferior to those of Britain.
Among the interior vallies the proportion of beeches and pines is so
great that other trees are scarcely noticeable; and surely such woods
are at all seasons much less agreeable than that rich and harmonious
distribution of oak, ash, elm, birch, and alder, that formerly clothed
the sides of Snowdon and Helvellyn; and of which no mean remains still
survive at the head of Ulswater. On the Italian side of the Alps,
chesnut and walnut-trees grow at a considerable height on the mountains;
but, even there, the foliage is not equal in beauty to the 'natural
product' of this climate. In fact the sunshine of the South of Europe,
so envied when heard of at a distance, is in many respects injurious to
rural beauty, particularly as it incites to the cultivation of spots of
ground which in colder climates would be left in the hands of Nature,
favouring at the same time the culture of plants that are more valuable
on account of the fruit they produce to gratify the palate, than for
affording pleasure to the eye, as materials of landscape. Take, for
instance, the Promontory of Bellagio, so fortunate in its command of the
three branches of the Lake of Como, yet the ridge of the Promontory
itself, being for the most part covered with vines interspersed with
olive-trees, accords but ill with the vastness of the green
unappropriated mountains, and derogates not a little from the sublimity
of those finely contrasted pictures to which it is a foreground. The
vine, when cultivated upon a large scale, notwithstanding all that may
be said of it in poetry,[64] makes but a dull formal appearance in
landscape; and the olive-tree (though one is loth to say so) is not more
grateful to the eye than our common willow, which it much resembles; but
the hoariness of hue, common to both, has in the aquatic plant an
appropriate delicacy, harmonising with the situation in which it most
delights. The same may no doubt be said of the olive among the dry rocks
of Attica, but I am speaking of it as found in gardens and vineyards in
the North of Italy. At Bellagio, what Englishman can resist the
temptation of substituting, in his fancy, for these formal treasures of
cultivation, the natural variety of one of our parks--its pastured
lawns, coverts of hawthorn, of wild-rose, and honeysuckle, and the
majesty of forest trees?--such wild graces as the banks of Derwent-water
shewed in the time of the Ratcliffes; and Growbarrow Park, Lowther, and
Rydal do at this day.

[63] The greatest variety of trees is found in the Valais.

As my object is to reconcile a Briton to the scenery of his own country,
though not at the expense of truth, I am not afraid of asserting that in
many points of view our LAKES, also, are much more interesting than
those of the Alps; first, as is implied above, from being more happily
proportioned to the other features of the landscape; and next, both as
being infinitely more pellucid, and less subject to agitation from the
winds.[65]

[64] Lucretius has charmingly described a scene of this kind.

     Inque dies magis in montem succedere sylvas
     Cogebant, infráquo locum coucedere cultis:
     Prata, lacus, rivos, segetes, vinetaque laeta
     Collibus et campis ut haberent, atque olearum
     _Caerula_ distinguens inter _plaga_ currere posset
     Per tumulos, et convalleis, camposque profusa:
     Ut nunc esse vides vario distincta lepore
     Onmia, quae pomis intersita dulcibus ornant,
     Arbustisque teneut felicibus obsita circúm.



[65] It is remarkable that Como (as is probably the case with other
Italian Lakes) is more troubled by storms in summer than in winter.
Hence the propriety of the following verses:

     Lari! margine ubique confragoso
     Nulli coelicolum negas sacellum
     Picto pariete saxeoque tecto;
     Hinc miracula multa navitarum
     Audis, nee placido refellis ore,
     Sed nova usque pavas, Noto vel Euro
     _Aestivas_ quatieutibus cavernas,
     Vel surgentis ab Adduae cubili
     Caeco grandinis imbre provoluto.     LANDOR.


Como, (which may perhaps be styled the King of Lakes, as Lugano is
certainly the Queen) is disturbed by a periodical wind blowing _from_
the head in the morning, and _towards_ it in the afternoon. The
magnificent Lake of the four Cantons, especially its noblest division,
called the Lake of Uri, is not only much agitated by winds, but in the
night time is disturbed from the bottom, as I was told, and indeed as I
witnessed, without any apparent commotion in the air; and when at rest,
the water is not pure to the eye, but of a heavy green hue--as is that
of all the other lakes, apparently according to the degree in which they
are fed by melted snows. If the Lake of Geneva furnish an exception,
this is probably owing to its vast extent, which allows the water to
deposit its impurities. The water of the English lakes, on the contrary,
being of a crystalline clearness, the reflections of the surrounding
hills are frequently so lively, that it is scarcely possible to
distinguish the point where the real object terminates, and its
unsubstantial duplicate begins. The lower part of the Lake of Geneva,
from its narrowness, must be much less subject to agitation than the
higher divisions, and, as the water is clearer than that of the other
Swiss Lakes, it will frequently exhibit this appearance, though it is
scarcely possible in an equal degree. During two comprehensive tours
among the Alps, I did not observe, except on one of the smaller lakes
between Lugano and Ponte Tresa, a single instance of those beautiful
repetitions of surrounding objects on the bosom of the water, which are
so frequently seen here: not to speak of the fine dazzling trembling
net-work, breezy motions, and streaks and circles of intermingled smooth
and rippled water, which make the surface of our lakes a field of
endless variety. But among the Alps, where every thing tends to the
grand and the sublime, in surfaces as well as in forms, if the lakes do
not court the placid reflections of land objects those of first-rate
magnitude make compensation, in some degree, by exhibiting those
ever-changing fields of green, blue, and purple shadows or lights, (one
scarcely knows which to name them) that call to mind a sea-prospect
contemplated from a lofty cliff.

The subject of torrents and waterfalls has already been touched upon;
but it may be added that in Switzerland, the perpetual accompaniment of
snow upon the higher regions takes much from the effect of foaming white
streams; while, from their frequency, they obstruct each other's
influence upon the mind of the spectator; and, in all cases, the effect
of an individual cataract, excepting the great Fall of the Rhine at
Schaffhausen, is diminished by the general fury of the stream of which
it is a part.

Recurring to the reflections from still water, I will describe a
singular phenomenon of this kind of which I was an eye-witness.

Walking by the side of Ulswater upon a calm September morning, I saw,
deep within the bosom of the Lake, a magnificent Castle, with towers and
battlements: nothing could be more distinct than the whole edifice.
After gazing with delight upon it for some time, as upon a work of
enchantment, I could not but regret that my previous knowledge of the
place enabled me to account for the appearance. It was in fact the
reflection of a pleasure-house called Lyulph's Tower--the towers and
battlements magnified and so much changed in shape as not to be
immediately recognised. In the meanwhile, the pleasure-house itself was
altogether hidden from my view by a body of vapour stretching over it
and along the hill-side on which it stands, but not so as to have
intercepted its communication with the lake; and hence this novel and
most impressive object, which, if I had been a stranger to the spot,
would, from its being inexplicable, have long detained the mind in a
state of pleasing astonishment.

Appearances of this kind, acting upon the credulity of early ages, may
have given birth to, and favoured the belief in, stories of sub-aqueous
palaces, gardens, and pleasure-grounds--the brilliant ornaments of
Romance.

With this _inverted_ scene I will couple a much more extraordinary
phenomenon, which will show how other elegant fancies may have had their
origin, less in invention than in the actual processes of Nature.

About eleven o'clock on the forenoon of a winter's day, coming
suddenly, in company of a friend, into view of the Lake of Grasmere, we
were alarmed by the sight of a newly-created Island; the transitory
thought of the moment was, that it had been produced by an earthquake or
some other convulsion of Nature. Recovering from the alarm, which was
greater than the reader can possibly sympathise with, but which was
shared to its full extent by my companion, we proceeded to examine the
object before us. The elevation of this new island exceeded considerably
that of the old one, its neighbour; it was likewise larger in
circumference, comprehending a space of about five acres; its surface
rocky, speckled with snow, and sprinkled over with birch-trees; it was
divided towards the south from the other island by a narrow frith, and
in like manner from the northern shore of the lake; on the east and west
it was separated from the shore by a much larger space of smooth water.

Marvellous was the illusion! Comparing the new with the old Island, the
surface of which is soft, green, and unvaried, I do not scruple to say
that, as an object of sight, it was much the more distinct. 'How little
faith,' we exclaimed, 'is due to one sense, unless its evidence be
confirmed by some of its fellows! What Stranger could possibly be
persuaded that this, which we know to be an unsubstantial mockery, is
_really_ so; and that there exists only a single Island on this
beautiful Lake?' At length the appearance underwent a gradual
transmutation; it lost its prominence and passed into a glimmering and
dim _inversion_, and then totally disappeared; leaving behind it a clear
open area of ice of the same dimensions. We now perceived that this bed
of ice, which was thinly suffused with water, had produced the illusion,
by reflecting and refracting (as persons skilled in optics would no
doubt easily explain) a rocky and woody section of the opposite mountain
named Silver-how.

Having dwelt so much upon the beauty of pure and still water, and
pointed out the advantage which the Lakes of the North of England have
in this particular over those of the Alps, it would be injustice not to
advert to the sublimity that must often be given to Alpine scenes, by
the agitations to which those vast bodies of diffused water are there
subject. I have witnessed many tremendous thunder-storms among the Alps,
and the most glorious effects of light and shadow: but I never happened
to be present when any Lake was agitated by those hurricanes which I
imagine must often torment them. If the commotions be at all
proportionable to the expanse and depth of the waters, and the height of
the surrounding mountains, then, if I may judge from what is frequently
seen here, the exhibition must be awful and astonishing.--On this day,
March 30, 1822, the winds have been acting upon the small Lake of Rydal,
as if they had received command to carry its waters from their bed into
the sky; the white billows in different quarters disappeared under
clouds, or rather drifts, of spray, that were whirled along, and up into
the air by scouring winds, charging each other in squadrons in every
direction, upon the Lake. The spray, having been hurried aloft till it
lost its consistency and whiteness, was driven along the mountain tops
like flying showers that vanish in the distance. Frequently an eddying
wind scooped the waters out of the basin, and forced them upwards in the
very shape of an Icelandic Geyser, or boiling fountain, to the height of
several hundred feet.

This small Mere of Rydal, from its position, is subject in a peculiar
degree to these commotions. The present season, however, is unusually
stormy;--great numbers of fish, two of them not less than 12 pounds
weight, were a few days ago cast on the shores of Derwent-water by the
force of the waves.

Lest, in the foregoing comparative estimate, I should be suspected of
partiality to my native mountains, I will support my general opinion by
the authority of Mr. West, whose Guide to the Lakes has been eminently
serviceable to the Tourist for nearly 50 years. The Author, a Roman
Catholic Clergyman, had passed much time abroad, and was well acquainted
with the scenery of the Continent. He thus expresses himself: 'They who
intend to make the continental tour should begin here; as it will give,
in miniature, an idea of what they are to meet with there, in traversing
the Alps and Appenines; to which our northern mountains are not inferior
in beauty of line, or variety of summit, number of lakes, and
transparency of water; not in colouring of rock, or softness of turf,
but in height and extent only. The mountains here are all accessible to
the summit, and furnish prospects no less surprising, and with more
variety, than the Alps themselves. The tops of the highest Alps are
inaccessible, being covered with everlasting snow, which commencing at
regular heights above the cultivated tracts, or wooded and verdant
sides, form indeed the highest contrast in Nature. For there may be seen
all the variety of climate in one view. To this, however, we oppose the
sight of the ocean, from the summits of all the higher mountains, as it
appears intersected with promontories, decorated with islands, and
animated with navigation.'--West's _Guide_, p.5.




EXCURSIONS TO THE TOP OF SCAWFELL AND ON THE BANKS OF ULSWATER.


It was my intention, several years ago, to describe a regular tour
through this country, taking the different scenes in the most favourable
order; but after some progress had been made in the work it was
abandoned from a conviction, that, if well executed, it would lessen the
pleasure of the Traveller by anticipation, and, if the contrary, it
would mislead him. The Reader may not, however, be displeased with the
following extract from a letter to a Friend, giving an account of a
visit to a summit of one of the highest of these mountains; of which I
am reminded by the observations of Mr. West, and by reviewing what has
been said of this district in comparison with the Alps.

Having left Rosthwaite in Borrowdale, on a bright morning in the first
week of October, we ascended from Seathwaite to the top of the ridge,
called Ash-course, and thence beheld three distinct views;--on one side,
the continuous Vale of Borrowdale, Keswick, and Bassenthwaite,--with
Skiddaw, Helvellyn, Saddle-back, and numerous other mountains--and, in
the distance, the Solway Frith and the Mountains of Scotland;--on the
other side, and below us, the Langdale Pikes--their own vale below
_them_;--Windermere,--and, far beyond Windermere, Ingleborough in
Yorkshire. But how shall I speak of the deliciousness of the third
prospect! At this time, _that_ was most favoured by sunshine and shade.
The green Vale of Esk--deep and green, with its glittering serpent
stream, lay below us; and, on we looked to the Mountains near the
Sea,--Black Comb pre-eminent,--and, still beyond, to the Sea itself, in
dazzling brightness. Turning round we saw the Mountains of Wastdale in
tumult; to our right, Great Gavel, the loftiest, a distinct, and _huge_
form, though the middle of the mountain was, to our eyes, as its base.

We had attained the object of this journey; but our ambition now mounted
higher. We saw the summit of Scawfell, apparently very near to us; and
we shaped our course towards it; but, discovering that it could not be
reached without first making a considerable descent, we resolved,
instead, to aim at another point of the same mountain, called the
_Pikes_, which I have since found has been estimated as higher than the
summit bearing the name of Scawfell Head, where the Stone Man is built.

The sun had never once been overshadowed by a cloud during the whole of
our progress from the centre of Borrowdale. On the summit of the Pike,
which we gained after much toil, though without difficulty, there was
not a breath of air to stir even the papers containing our refreshment,
as they lay spread out upon a rock. The stillness seemed to be not of
this world:--we paused, and kept silence to listen; and no sound could
be heard: the Scawfell Cataracts were voiceless to us; and there was not
an insect to hum in the air. The vales which we had seen from Ash-course
lay yet in view; and, side by side with Eskdale, we now saw the sister
Vale of Donnerdale terminated by the Duddon Sands. But the majesty of
the mountains below, and close to us, is not to be conceived. We now
beheld the whole mass of Great Gavel from its base,--the Den of Wastdale
at our feet--a gulf immeasurable: Grasmire and the other mountains of
Crummock--Ennerdale and its mountains; and the Sea beyond! We sat down
to our repast, and gladly would we have tempered our beverage (for there
was no spring or well near us) with such a supply of delicious water as
we might have procured, had we been on the rival summit of Great Gavel;
for on its highest point is a small triangular receptacle in the native
rock, which, the shepherds say, is never dry. There we might have slaked
our thirst plenteously with a pure and celestial liquid, for the cup or
basin, it appears, has no other feeder than the dews of heaven, the
showers, the vapours, the hoar frost, and the spotless snow.

While we were gazing around, 'Look,' I exclaimed, 'at yon ship upon the
glittering sea!' 'Is it a ship?' replied our shepherd-guide. 'It can be
nothing else,' interposed my companion; 'I cannot be mistaken, I am so
accustomed to the appearance of ships at sea.' The Guide dropped the
argument; but, before a minute was gone, he quietly said, 'Now look at
your ship; it is changed into a horse.' So indeed it was,--a horse with
a gallant neck and head. We laughed heartily; and, I hope, when again
inclined to be positive, I may remember the ship and the horse upon the
glittering sea; and the calm confidence, yet submissiveness, of our
wise Man of the Mountains, who certainly had more knowledge of clouds
than we, whatever might be our knowledge of ships.

I know not how long we might have remained on the summit of the Pike,
without a thought of moving, had not our Guide warned us that we must
not linger; for a storm was coming. We looked in vain to espy the signs
of it. Mountains, vales, and sea were touched with the clear light of
the sun. 'It is there,' said he, pointing to the sea beyond Whitehaven,
and there we perceived a light vapour unnoticeable but by a shepherd
accustomed to watch all mountain bodings. We gazed around again, and yet
again, unwilling to lose the remembrance of what lay before us in that
lofty solitude; and then prepared to depart. Meanwhile the air changed
to cold, and we saw that tiny vapour swelled into mighty masses of cloud
which came boiling over the mountains. Great Gavel, Helvellyn, and
Skiddaw, were wrapped in storm; yet Langdale, and the mountains in that
quarter, remained all bright in sunshine. Soon the storm reached us; we
sheltered under a crag; and almost as rapidly as it had come it passed
away, and left us free to observe the struggles of gloom and sunshine in
other quarters. Langdale now had its share, and the Pikes of Langdale
were decorated by two splendid rainbows. Skiddaw also had his own
rainbows. Before we again reached Ash-course every cloud had vanished
from every summit.

I ought to have mentioned that round the top of Scawfell-PIKE not a
blade of grass is to be seen. Cushions or tufts of moss, parched and
brown, appear between the huge blocks and stones that lie in heaps on
all sides to a great distance, like skeletons or bones of the earth not
needed at the creation, and there left to be covered with never-dying
lichens, which the clouds and dews nourish; and adorn with colours of
vivid and exquisite beauty. Flowers, the most brilliant feathers, and
even gems, scarcely surpass in colouring some of those masses of stone,
which no human eye beholds, except the shepherd or traveller be led
thither by curiosity: and how seldom must this happen! For the other
eminence is the one visited by the adventurous stranger; and the
shepherd has no inducement to ascend the PIKE in quest of his sheep; no
food being _there_ to tempt them.

We certainly were singularly favoured in the weather; for when we were
seated on the summit, our conductor, turning his eyes thoughtfully
round, said, 'I do not know that in my whole life, I was ever, at any
season of the year, so high upon the mountains on so _calm_ a day.' (It
was the 7th of October.) Afterwards we had a spectacle of the grandeur
of earth and heaven commingled; yet without terror. We knew that the
storm would pass away;--for so our prophetic Guide had assured us.

Before we reached Seathwaite in Borrowdale, a few stars had appeared,
and we pursued our way down the Vale, to Rosthwaite, by moonlight.

Scawfell and Helvellyn being the two Mountains of this region which will
best repay the fatigue of ascending them, the following Verses may be
here introduced with propriety. They are from the Author's Miscellaneous
Poems.


_To--_.

ON HER FIRST ASCENT TO THE SUMMIT OF HELVELLYN.

    Inmate of a Mountain Dwelling,
    Thou hast clomb aloft, and gazed,
    From the watch-towers of Helvellyn;
    Awed, delighted, and amazed!

    Potent was the spell that bound thee
    Not unwilling to obey;
    For blue Ether's arms, flung round thee,
    Stilled the pantings of dismay.

    Lo! the dwindled woods and meadows!
    What a vast abyss is there!
    Lo! the clouds, the solemn shadows,
    And the glistenings--heavenly fair!

    And a record of commotion
    Which a thousand ridges yield;
    Ridge, and gulf, and distant ocean
    Gleaming like a silver shield!

    --Take thy flight;--possess, inherit
    Alps or Andes--they are thine!
    With the morning's roseate Spirit,
    Sweep their length of snowy line;

    Or survey the bright dominions
    In the gorgeous colours drest
    Flung from off the purple pinions,
    Evening spreads throughout the west!

    Thine are all the coral fountains
    Warbling in each sparry vault
    Of the untrodden lunar mountains;
    Listen to their songs!--or halt,

    To Niphate's top invited,
    Whither spiteful Satan steered;
    Or descend where the ark alighted,
    When the green earth re-appeared:

    For the power of hills is on thee,
    As was witnessed through thine eye
    Then, when old Helvellyn won thee
    To confess their majesty!

Having said so much of _points of view_ to which few are likely to
ascend, I am induced to subjoin an account of a short excursion through
more accessible parts of the country, made at a _time_ when it is seldom
seen but by the inhabitants. As the journal was written for one
acquainted with the general features of the country, only those effects
and appearances are dwelt upon, which are produced by the changeableness
of the atmosphere, or belong to the season when the excursion was made.

A.D. 1805.--On the 7th of November, on a damp and gloomy morning, we
left Grasmere Vale, intending to pass a few days on the banks of
Ullswater. A mild and dry autumn had been unusually favourable to the
preservation and beauty of foliage; and, far advanced as the season was,
the trees on the larger Island of Rydal-mere retained a splendour which
did not need the heightening of sunshine. We noticed, as we passed, that
the line of the grey rocky shore of that island, shaggy with variegated
bushes and shrubs, and spotted and striped with purplish brown heath,
indistinguishably blending with its image reflected in the still water,
produced a curious resemblance, both in form and colour, to a
richly-coated caterpillar, as it might appear through a magnifying glass
of extraordinary power. The mists gathered as we went along: but, when
we reached the top of Kirkstone, we were glad we had not been
discouraged by the apprehension of bad weather. Though not able to see a
hundred yards before us, we were more than contented. At such a time,
and in such a place, every scattered stone the size of one's head
becomes a companion. Near the top of the Pass is the remnant of an old
wall, which (magnified, though obscured, by the vapour) might have been
taken for a fragment of some monument of ancient grandeur,--yet that
same pile of stones we had never before even observed. This situation,
it must be allowed, is not favourable to gaiety; but a pleasing hurry of
spirits accompanies the surprise occasioned by objects transformed,
dilated, or distorted, as they are when seen through such a medium. Many
of the fragments of rock on the top and slopes of Kirkstone, and of
similar places, are fantastic enough in themselves; but the full effect
of such impressions can only be had in a state of weather when they are
not likely to be _sought_ for. It was not till we had descended
considerably that the fields of Hartshope were seen, like a lake tinged
by the reflection of sunny clouds: I mistook them for Brotherswater,
but, soon after, we saw that lake gleaming faintly with a steelly
brightness,--then, as we continued to descend, appeared the brown oaks,
and the birches of lively yellow--and the cottages--and the lowly Hall
of Hartshope, with its long roof and ancient chimneys. During great part
of our way to Patterdale, we had rain, or rather drizzling vapour; for
there was never a drop upon our hair or clothes larger than the smallest
pearls upon a lady's ring.

The following morning, incessant rain till 11 o'clock, when the sky
began to clear, and we walked along the eastern shore of Ullswater
towards the farm of Blowick. The wind blew strong, and drove the clouds
forward, on the side of the mountain above our heads;--two
storm-stiffened black yew-trees fixed our notice, seen through, or under
the edge of, the flying mists,--four or five goats were bounding among
the rocks;--the sheep moved about more quietly, or cowered beneath their
sheltering places. This is the only part of the country where goats are
now found;[66] but this morning, before we had seen these, I was
reminded of that picturesque animal by two rams of mountain breed, both
with Ammonian horns, and with beards majestic as that which Michael
Angelo has given to his statue of Moses.--But to return; when our path
had brought us to that part of the naked common which overlooks the
woods and bush-besprinkled fields of Blowick, the lake, clouds, and
mists were all in motion to the sound of sweeping winds;--the church and
cottages of Patterdale scarcely visible, or seen only by fits between
the shifting vapours. To the northward the scene was less
visionary;--Place Fell steady and bold;--the whole lake driving onward
like a great river--waves dancing round the small islands. The house at
Blowick was the boundary of our walk; and we returned, lamenting to see
a decaying and uncomfortable dwelling in a place where sublimity and
beauty seemed to contend with each other. But these regrets were
dispelled by a glance on the woods that clothe the opposite steeps of
the lake. How exquisite was the mixture of sober and splendid hues! The
general colouring of the trees was brown--rather that of ripe hazel
nuts; but towards the water, there were yet beds of green, and in the
highest parts of the wood, was abundance of yellow foliage, which,
gleaming through a vapoury lustre, reminded us of masses of clouds, as
you see them gathered together in the west, and touched with the golden
light of the setting sun.

[66] A.D. 1835. These also have disappeared.

After dinner we walked up the Vale; I had never had an idea of its
extent and width in passing along the public road on the other side. We
followed the path that leads from house to house; two or three times it
took us through some of those copses or groves that cover the little
hillocks in the middle of the vale, making an intricate and pleasing
intermixture of lawn and wood. Our fancies could not resist the
temptation; and we fixed upon a spot for a cottage, which we began to
build: and finished as easily as castles are raised in the air.--Visited
the same spot in the evening. I shall say nothing of the moonlight
aspect of the situation which had charmed us so much in the afternoon;
but I wish you had been with us when, in returning to our friend's
house, we espied his lady's large white dog, lying in the moonshine upon
the round knoll under the old yew-tree in the garden, a romantic
image--the dark tree and its dark shadow--and the elegant creature, as
fair as a spirit! The torrents murmured softly: the mountains down which
they were falling did not, to my sight, furnish a back-ground for this
Ossianic picture; but I had a consciousness of the depth of the
seclusion, and that mountains were embracing us on all sides; 'I saw
not, but I _felt_ that they were there.'

Friday, November 9th.--Rain, as yesterday, till 10 o'clock, when we took
a boat to row down the lake. The day improved,--clouds and sunny gleams
on the mountains. In the large bay under Place Fell, three fishermen
were dragging a net,--picturesque group beneath the high and bare crags!
A raven was seen aloft: not hovering like the kite, for that is not the
habit of the bird; but passing on with a straight-forward perseverance,
and timing the motion of its wings to its own croaking. The waters were
agitated; and the iron tone of the raven's voice, which strikes upon the
ear at all times as the more dolorous from its regularity, was in fine
keeping with the wild scene before our eyes. This carnivorous fowl is a
great enemy to the lambs of these solitudes; I recollect frequently
seeing, when a boy, bunches of unfledged ravens suspended from the
church-yard gates of H----, for which a reward of so much a head was
given to the adventurous destroyer.--The fishermen drew their net
ashore, and hundreds of fish were leaping in their prison. They were all
of the kind called skellies, a sort of fresh-water herring, shoals of
which may sometimes be seen dimpling or rippling the surface of the lake
in calm weather. This species is not found, I believe, in any other of
these lakes; nor, as far as I know, is the chevin, that _spiritless_
fish, (though I am loth to call it so, for it was a prime favourite with
Isaac Walton,) which must frequent Ullswater, as I have seen a large
shoal passing into the lake from the river Eamont. _Here_ are no pike,
and the char are smaller than those of the other lakes, and of inferior
quality; but the grey trout attains a very large size, sometimes
weighing above twenty pounds. This lordly creature seems to know that
'retiredness is a piece of majesty;' for it is scarcely ever caught, or
even seen, except when it quits the depths of the lake in the spawning
season, and runs up into the streams, where it is too often destroyed in
disregard of the law of the land and of Nature.

Quitted the boat in the bay of Sandwyke, and pursued our way towards
Martindale along a pleasant path--at first through a coppice, bordering
the lake, then through green fields--and came to the village, (if
village it may be called, for the houses are few, and separated from
each other,) a sequestered spot, shut out from the view of the lake.
Crossed the one-arched bridge, below the chapel, with its 'bare ring of
mossy wall,' and single yew-tree. At the last house in the dale we were
greeted by the master, who was sitting at his door, with a flock of
sheep collected round him, for the purpose of smearing them with tar
(according to the custom of the season) for protection against the
winter's cold. He invited us to enter, and view a room built by Mr.
Hasell for the accommodation of his friends at the annual chase of red
deer in his forests at the head of these dales. The room is fitted up
in the sportsman's style, with a cupboard for bottles and glasses, with
strong chairs, and a dining-table; and ornamented with the horns of the
stags caught at these hunts for a succession of years--the length of the
last race each had run being recorded under his spreading antlers. The
good woman treated us with oaten cake, new and crisp; and after this
welcome refreshment and rest, we proceeded on our return to Patterdale
by a short cut over the mountains. On leaving the fields of Sandwyke,
while ascending by a gentle slope along the valley of Martindale, we had
occasion to observe that in thinly-peopled glens of this character the
general want of wood gives a peculiar interest to the scattered cottages
embowered in sycamore. Towards its head, this valley splits into two
parts; and in one of these (that to the left) there is no house, nor any
building to be seen but a cattle-shed on the side of a hill, which is
sprinkled over with trees, evidently the remains of an extensive forest.
Near the entrance of the other division stands the house where we were
entertained, and beyond the enclosures of that farm there are no other.
A few old trees remain, relics of the forest, a little stream hastens,
though with serpentine windings, through the uncultivated hollow, where
many cattle were pasturing. The cattle of this country are generally
white, or light-coloured; but these were dark brown, or black, which
heightened the resemblance this scene bears to many parts of the
Highlands of Scotland.--While we paused to rest upon the hill-side,
though well contented with the quiet every-day sounds--the lowing of
cattle, bleating of sheep, and the very gentle murmuring of the valley
stream, we could not but think what a grand effect the music of the
bugle-horn would have among these mountains. It is still heard once
every year, at the chase I have spoken of; a day of festivity for the
inhabitants of this district except the poor deer, the most ancient of
them all. Our ascent even to the top was very easy; when it was
accomplished we had exceedingly fine views, some of the lofty Fells
being resplendent with sunshine, and others partly shrouded by clouds.
Ullswater, bordered by black steeps, was of dazzling brightness; the
plain beyond Penrith smooth and bright, or rather gleamy, as the sea or
sea sands. Looked down into Boardale, which, like Stybarrow, has been
named from the wild swine that formerly abounded here; but it has now no
sylvan covert, being smooth and bare, a long, narrow, deep,
cradle-shaped glen, lying so sheltered that one would be pleased to see
it planted by human hands, there being a sufficiency of soil; and the
trees would be sheltered almost like shrubs in a green-house.--After
having walked some way along the top of the hill, came in view of
Glenriddin and the mountains at the head of Grisdale.--Before we began
to descend turned aside to a small ruin, called at this day the chapel,
where it is said the inhabitants of Martindale and Patterdale were
accustomed to assemble for worship. There are now no traces from which
you could infer for what use the building had been erected; the loose
stones and the few which yet continue piled up resemble those which lie
elsewhere on the mountain; but the shape of the building having been
oblong, its remains differ from those of a common sheep-fold; and it has
stood east and west. Scarcely did the Druids, when they fled to these
fastnesses, perform their rites in any situation more exposed to
disturbance from the elements. One cannot pass by without being reminded
that the rustic psalmody must have had the accompaniment of many a
wildly-whistling blast; and what dismal storms must have often drowned
the voice of the preacher! As we descend, Patterdale opens upon the eye
in grand simplicity, screened by mountains, and proceeding from two
heads, Deep-dale and Hartshope, where lies the little lake of
Brotherswater, named in old maps Broaderwater, and probably rightly so;
for Bassenthwaite-mere at this day is familiarly called Broadwater; but
the change in the appellation of this small lake or pool (if it be a
corruption) may have been assisted by some melancholy accident similar
to what happened about twenty years ago, when two brothers were drowned
there, having gone out to take their holiday pleasure upon the ice on a
new-year's day.

A rough and precipitous peat track brought us down to our friend's
house.--Another fine moonlight night; but a thick fog rising from the
neighbouring river, enveloped the rocky and wood-crested knoll on which
our fancy cottage had been erected; and, under the damp cast upon my
feelings, I consoled myself with moralising on the folly of hasty
decisions in matters of importance, and the necessity of having at least
one year's knowledge of a place before you realise airy suggestions in
solid stone.

Saturday, November 10th.--At the breakfast-table tidings reached us of
the death of Lord Nelson, and of the victory at Trafalgar. Sequestered
as we were from the sympathy of a crowd, we were shocked to hear that
the bells had been ringing joyously at Penrith to celebrate the triumph.
In the rebellion of the year 1745, people fled with their valuables from
the open country to Patterdale, as a place of refuge secure from the
incursions of strangers. At that time, news such as we had heard might
have been long in penetrating so far into the recesses of the mountains;
but now, as you know, the approach is easy, and the communication, in
summer time, almost hourly: nor is this strange, for travellers after
pleasure are become not less active, and more numerous than those who
formerly left their homes for purposes of gain. The priest on the banks
of the remotest stream of Lapland will talk familiarly of Buonaparte's
last conquests, and discuss the progress of the French revolution,
having acquired much of his information from adventurers impelled by
curiosity alone.

The morning was clear and cheerful after a night of sharp frost. At 10
o'clock we took our way on foot towards Pooley Bridge, on the same side
of the lake we had coasted in a boat the day before.--Looked backwards
to the south from our favourite station above Blowick. The dazzling
sunbeams striking upon the church and village, while the earth was
steaming with exhalations not traceable in other quarters, rendered
their forms even more indistinct than the partial and flitting veil of
unillumined vapour had done two days before. The grass on which we trod,
and the trees in every thicket, were dripping with melted hoar-frost. We
observed the lemon-coloured leaves of the birches, as the breeze turned
them to the sun, sparkle, or rather _flash_, like diamonds, and the
leafless purple twigs were tipped with globes of shining crystal.

The day continued delightful, and unclouded to the end. I will not
describe the country which we slowly travelled through, nor relate our
adventures: and will only add, that on the afternoon of the 13th we
returned along the banks of Ullswater by the usual road. The lake lay in
deep repose after the agitations of a wet and stormy morning. The trees
in Gowbarrow park were in that state when what is gained by the
disclosure of their bark and branches compensates, almost, for the loss
of foliage, exhibiting the variety which characterises the point of time
between autumn and winter. The hawthorns were leafless; their round
heads covered with rich scarlet berries, and adorned with arches of
green brambles, and eglantines hung with glossy hips; and the grey
trunks of some of the ancient oaks, which in the summer season might
have been regarded only for their venerable majesty, now attracted
notice by a pretty embellishment of green mosses and fern intermixed
with russet leaves retained by those slender outstarting twigs which the
veteran tree would not have tolerated in his strength. The smooth silver
branches of the ashes were bare; most of the alders as green as the
Devonshire cottage-myrtle that weathers the snows of Christmas.--Will
you accept it as some apology for my having dwelt so long on the
woodland ornaments of these scenes--that artists speak of the trees on
the banks of Ullswater, and especially along the bays of Stybarrow
crags, as having a peculiar character of picturesque intricacy in their
stems and branches, which their rocky stations and the mountain winds
have combined to give them?

At the end of Gowbarrow park a large herd of deer were either moving
slowly or standing still among the fern. I was sorry when a
chance-companion, who had joined us by the way, startled them with a
whistle, disturbing an image of grave simplicity and thoughtful
enjoyment; for I could have fancied that those natives of this wild and
beautiful region were partaking with us a sensation of the solemnity of
the closing day. The sun had been set some time; and we could perceive
that the light was fading away from the coves of Helvellyn, but the lake
under a luminous sky, was more brilliant than before.

After tea at Patterdale, set out again:--a fine evening; the seven stars
close to the mountain-top; all the stars seemed brighter than usual. The
steeps were reflected in Brotherswater, and, above the lake, appeared
like enormous black perpendicular walls. The Kirkstone torrents had been
swoln by the rains, and now filled the mountain pass with their roaring,
which added greatly to the solemnity of our walk. Behind us, when we had
climbed to a great height, we saw one light, very distinct, in the vale,
like a large red star--a solitary one in the gloomy region. The
cheerfulness of the scene was in the sky above us.

Reached home a little before midnight. The following verses (from the
Author's Miscellaneous Poems,) after what has just been read may be
acceptable to the reader, by way of conclusion to this little Volume.


ODE.

THE PASS OF KIRKSTONE.

    I.

    Within the mind strong fancies work,
    A deep delight the bosom thrills,
    Oft as I pass along the fork
    Of these fraternal hills:
    Where, save the rugged road, we find
    No appanage of human kind;
    Nor hint of man, if stone or rock
    Seem not his handy-work to mock
    By something cognizably shaped;
    Mockery--or model roughly hewn,
    And left as if by earthquake strewn,
    Or from the Flood escaped:
    Altars for Druid service fit;
    (But where no fire was ever lit,
    Unless the glow-worm to the skies
    Thence offer nightly sacrifice;)
    Wrinkled Egyptian monument;
    Green moss-grown tower; or hoary tent;
    Tents of a camp that never shall be raised;
    On which four thousand years have gazed!


    II.

    Ye plough-shares sparkling on the slopes!
    Ye snow-white lambs that trip
    Imprisoned 'mid the formal props
    Of restless ownership!
    Ye trees, that may to-morrow fall
    To feed the insatiate Prodigal!
    Lawns, houses, chattels, groves, and fields,
    All that the fertile valley shields;
    Wages of folly--baits of crime,--
    Of life's uneasy game the stake,
    Playthings that keep the eyes awake
    Of drowsy, dotard Time;
    O care! O guilt!--O vales and plains,
    Here, 'mid his own unvexed domains,
    A Genius dwells, that can subdue
    At once all memory of You,--
    Most potent when mists veil the sky,
    Mists that distort and magnify;
    While the hoarse rushes, to the sweeping breeze,
    Sigh forth their ancient melodies!


    III.

    List to those shriller notes!--_that_ march
    Perchance was on the blast,
    When through this Height's inverted arch,
    Rome's earliest legion passed!
    --They saw, adventurously impelled,
    And older eyes than theirs beheld,
    This block--and yon, whose Church-like frame
    Gives to the savage Pass its name.
    Aspiring Road! that lov'st to hide
    Thy daring in a vapoury bourn,
    Not seldom may the hour return
    When thou shalt be my Guide:
    And I (as often we find cause,
    When life is at a weary pause,
    And we have panted up the hill
    Of duty with reluctant will)
    Be thankful, even though tired and faint,
    For the rich bounties of Constraint;
    Whence oft invigorating transports flow
    That Choice lacked courage to bestow!


    IV.

    My Soul was grateful for delight
    That wore a threatening brow;
    A veil is lifted--can she slight
    The scene that opens now?
    Though habitation none appear,
    The greenness tells, man must be there;
    The shelter--that the perspective
    Is of the clime in which we live;
    Where Toil pursues his daily round;
    Where Pity sheds sweet tears, and Love,
    In woodbine bower or birchen grove,
    Inflicts his tender wound.
    --Who comes not hither ne'er shall know
    How beautiful the world below;
    Nor can he guess how lightly leaps
    The brook adown the rocky steeps.
    Farewell, thou desolate Domain!
    Hope, pointing to the cultured Plain,
    Carols like a shepherd boy;
    And who is she?--Can that be Joy!
    Who, with a sun-beam for her guide,
    Smoothly skims the meadows wide;
    While Faith, from yonder opening cloud,
    To hill and vale proclaims aloud,
    'Whate'er the weak may dread, the wicked dare,
    Thy lot, O man, is good, thy portion fair!'


_The Publishers, with permission of the Author, have added the
following_




ITINERARY OF THE LAKES, FOR THE USE OF TOURISTS.

       *       *       *       *       *

STAGES.                                               MILES.

Lancaster to Kendal, by Kirkby Lonsdale                 30
Lancaster to Kendal, by Burton                          22
Lancaster to Kendal, by Milnthorpe                      21
Lancaster to Ulverston, over Sands                      21
Lancaster to Ulverston, by Levens Bridge                35-1/2
Ulverston to Hawkshead, by Coniston Water Head          19
Ulverston to Bowness, by Newby Bridge                   17
Hawkshead to Ambleside                                   5
Hawkshead to Bowness                                     6
Kendal to Ambleside                                     14
Kendal to Ambleside, by Bowness                         15
From and back to Ambleside round the two Langdales      18
Ambleside to Ullswater                                  10
Ambleside to Keswick                                    16-1/4
Keswick to Borrowdale, and round the Lake               12
Keswick to Borrowdale and Buttermere                    23
Keswick to Wastdale and Calder Bridge                   27
Calder Bridge to Buttermere and Keswick                 29
Keswick, round Bassenthwaite Lake                       18
Keswick to Patterdale, Pooley Bridge, and Penrith       38
Keswick to Pooley Bridge and Penrith                    24
Keswick to Penrith                                      17-1/2
Whitehaven to Keswick                                   27
Workington to Keswick                                   21
Excursion from Penrith to Hawes Water                   27
Carlisle to Penrith                                     18
Penrith to Kendal                                       26

       *       *       *       *       *

_Inns and Public Houses, when not mentioned, are marked thus *_.

LANCASTER to KENDAL, by Kirkby Lonsdale, 30 miles.

MILES.             MILES.
 5 Caton               5
 2 Claughton           7
 2 Hornby*             9
 2 Melling            11
 2 Tunstall           13
 2 Burrow             15
 2 Kirkby Lonsdale    17
13 Kendal             30


INNS--_Lancaster_: King's Arms, Commercial Inn, Royal Oak. _Kirkby
Lonsdale_: Rose and Crown, Green Dragon.

LANCASTER to KENDAL, by Burton, 21-3/4 miles.

MILES.                            MILES.
10-3/4 Burton                    10-3/4
4-3/4 Crooklands                 15-1/2
1/2 End Moor*                    16
5-3/4 Kendal                     21-3/4

INNS: _Kendal_: King's Arms, Commercial Inn. _Burton_: Royal Oak,
King's Arms.

LANCASTER to KENDAL, by Milnthorpe, 21-1/4/miles.

2-3/4 Slyne*                      2-3/4
1-1/4 Bolton-le-Sands*            4
2     Carnforth*                  6
2     Junction of the Milnthorpe
and Burton roads                  8
4     Hale*                      12
1/2 Beethom*                     12-1/2
1-1/4 Milnthorpe                 13-3/4
1-1/4 Heversham*                 15
1-1/2 Levens-Bridge              16-1/2
4-3/4 Kendal                     21-1/4

INN--_Milnthorpe_: Cross Keys.
LANCASTER to ULVERSTON, over Sands, 21 miles.

3-1/2 Hest Bank*                  3-1/2
1/4 Lancaster Sands               3-3/4
9     Kent's Bank                12-3/4
1     Lower Allithwaite          13-3/4
1-1/4 Flookburgh*                15
3/4 Cark                         15-3/4
1/4 Leven Sands                  16
5     Ulverston                  21

INNS--_Ulverston_: Sun Inn, Bradyll's Arms.

LANCASTER to ULVERSTON, by Levens-Bridge, 35-1/2 miles.

12     Hale*                     12
1/2 Beethom*                     12-1/2
1-1/4 Milnthorpe                 13-3/4
1-1/4 Heversham*                 15
2-3/4 Levens-Bridge              16-1/2
4     Witherslack*               20-1/2
3     Lindal*                    23
2     Newton*                    25
2     Newby-Bridge*              27-1/2
2     Low Wood                   29-1/2
3     Greenodd                   32-1/2
3     Ulverston                  35-1/2

ULVERSTON to HAWKSHEAD, by Coniston Water-Head, 19 miles.

6     Lowick-Bridge               6
2     Nibthwaite                  8
8     Coniston Water-Head*       16
3     Hawkshead                  19

INN--_Hawkshead_: Red Lion.

ULVERSTON to BOWNESS, by Newby-Bridge, 16 miles.

3     Greenodd                    3
3     Low Wood                    6
2     Newby-Bridge                8
8     Bowness                    16

INNS--_Bowness_: White Lion, Crown Inn.

HAWKSHEAD to AMBLESIDE, 5 miles.

HAWKSHEAD to BOWNESS, 5-1/2 miles.

2     Sawrey                      2
2     Windermere-ferry*           4
1-1/2 Bowness                     5-1/2


KENDAL to AMBLESIDE, 13-1/2 miles.

5     Staveley*                   5
1-1/2 Ings Chapel                 6-1/2
2     Orrest-head                 8-1/2
1-1/2 Troutbeck-Bridge*          10
2     Low Wood Inn               12
1-1/2 Ambleside                  13-1/2

INNS--_Ambleside_: Salutation Hotel, Commercial Inn.

KENDAL to AMBLESIDE, by Bowness, 15 miles.

MILES.                            MILES.
4     Crook*                      4
2     Gilpin-Bridge*              6
3     Bowness                     9
2-1/2 Troutbeck-Bridge           11-1/2
2     Low Wood Inn               13-1/2
1-1/2 Ambleside                  15

A Circuit from and back to AMBLESIDE, by Little and Great Langdale,
18 miles.

3     Skelwith-Bridge*            3
2     Colwith Cascade             5
3     Blea Tarn                   8
3     Dungeon Ghyll              11
2     Langdale Chapel Stile*     13
5     By High Close and Rydal
      to Ambleside             18

AMBLESIDE to ULLSWATER, 10 miles.

4     Top of Kirkstone            4
3     Kirkstone Foot              7
3     Inn at Patterdale          10

AMBLESIDE to KESWICK, 16-1/4 miles.

1-1/2 Rydal                       1-1/2
3-1/2 Swan, Grassmere*            5
2     Dunmail Raise               7
1-1/4 Nag's Head, Wythburn        8-1/4
4     Smalthwaite-Bridge         12-1/4
3     Castlerigg                 15-1/4
1     Keswick                    16-1/4

       *       *       *       *       *

EXCURSIONS FROM KESWICK.

INNS--_Keswick_: Royal Oak, Queen's Head.

To BORROWDALE, and ROUND THE LAKE, 12 miles.

2     Barrow House                2
1     Lowdore                     3
1     Grange                      4
1     Bowder Stone                5
1     Return to Grange            6
4-1/2 Portinscale                10-1/2
1-1/2 Keswick                    12

To BORROWDALE and BUTTERMERE.

5     Bowder Stone                5
1     Rosthwaite                  6
2     Seatoller                   8
4     Gatesgarth                 12
2     Buttermere*                14
9     Keswick, by Newlands       23

Two Days' Excursion to WASTDALE, ENNERDALE, and LOWES-WATER.

_First Day._

6     Rosthwaite                  6
2     Seatoller                   8
1     Seathwaite                  9
3     Sty-head                   12
2     Wastdale-head              14
6     Strands,* Nether Wastdale  20
4     Gosforth*                  24
3     Calder-Bridge*             27

_Second Day._

7     Ennerdale-Bridge            7
3     Lamplugh Cross*            10
4     Lowes-Water                14
2     Scale-hill*                16
4     Buttermere*                20
9     Keswick                    29

KESWICK round BASSENTHWAITE WATER.

MILES.                            MILES.

8     Peel Wyke*                  8
1     Ouse-Bridge                 9
1     Castle Inn                 10
3     Bassenthwaite Sandbed      13
5     Keswick                    18

KESWICK to PATTERDALE, and by Pooley-Bridge to PENRITH.

10     Springfield*               10
 7     Gowbarrow Park             17
 5     Patterdale*                22
10     Pooley--Bridge* through
         Gowbarrow Park           32
 6     Penrith                    38

INNS--_Penrith_: Crown Inn, the George.

KESWICK to POOLEY-BRIDGE and PENRITH.

12     Penruddock*                12
3     Dacre*                     15
3     Pooley-Bridge              18
6     Penrith                    24

KESWICK to PENRITH, 17-1/2 miles.

4     Threlkeld*                  4
7-1/2 Penruddock                 11-1/2
3-1/2 Stainton*                  15
2-1/2 Penrith                    17-1/2

*       *       *       *       *

WHITEHAVEN to KESWICK, 27 miles.

2     Moresby                     2
2     Distington                  4
2     Winscales                   6
3     Little Clifton              9
5     Cockermouth                14
2-1/2 Embleton                   16-1/2
6-1/2 Thornthwaite               23
4     Keswick                    27

INNS--_Whitehaven_: Black Lion, Golden Lion, the Globe.  _Cockermouth_:
The Globe, the Sun.

WORKINGTON to KESWICK, 21 miles.

The road joins that from Whitehaven to Keswick 4 miles from Workington.

INNS--_Workington_: Green Dragon, New Crown, King's Arms.

Excursion from PENRITH to HAWESWATER.

5     Lowther, or Askham*         5
7     By Bampton* to Haweswater  12
4     Return by Butterswick      16
5     Over Moor Dovack to
        Pooley                   21
6     By Dalemain to Penrith     27

CARLISLE to PENRITH, 18 miles.

2-1/2 Carlton*                    2-1/2
7     Low Hesket*                 9-1/2
1-1/2 High Hesket*               11
2     Plumpton*                  13
5     Penrith                    18

INNS--_Carlisle_: The Bush Coffee-House, King's Arms.

PENRITH to KENDAL, 26 miles.

1     Eamont-Bridge*              1
1-1/2 Clifton*                    2-1/2
2     Hackthorpe*                 4-1/2
5-3/4 Shap                       10-1/4
6-3/4 Hawse Foot*                17
4     Plough Inn*                21
2-1/2 Skelsmergh Stocks*         23-1/2
2-1/2 Kendal                     26

INNS--_Shap_: Greyhound, King's Arms.


KENDAL AND WINDERMERE RAILWAY.

       *       *       *       *       *

TWO LETTERS

RE-PRINTED FROM THE MORNING POST.

REVISED, WITH ADDITIONS.

       *       *       *       *       *

KENDAL:

PRINTED BY E. BRANTHWAITE AND SON.

[1844.]

NOTE.

See Preface in Vol. I. for details on these Letters, &c. G.




SONNET ON THE PROJECTED KENDAL AND WINDERMERE RAILWAY.

    Is then no nook of English ground secure
    From rash assault? Schemes of retirement sown
    In youth, and mid the busy world kept pure
    As when their earliest flowers of hope were blown,
    Must perish;--how can they this blight endure?
    And must he too the ruthless change bemoan
    Who scorns a false utilitarian lure
    Mid his paternal fields at random thrown?
    Baffle the threat, bright Scene, from Orrest-head
    Given to the pausing traveller's rapturous glance:
    Plead for thy peace, thou beautiful romance
    Of nature; and, if human hearts be dead,
    Speak, passing winds; ye torrents, with your strong
    And constant voice, protest against the wrong.

     WILLIAM WORDSWORTH. Rydal Mount, October 12th, 1844.

The degree and kind of attachment which many of the yeomanry feel to
their small inheritances can scarcely be over-rated. Near the house of
one of them stands a magnificent tree, which a neighbour of the owner
advised him to fell for profit's sake. 'Fell it,' exclaimed the yeoman,
'I had rather fall on my knees and worship it.' It happens, I believe,
that the intended railway would pass through this little property, and I
hope that an apology for the answer will not be thought necessary by one
who enters into the strength of the feeling.

W.W.

KENDAL AND WINDERMERE RAILWAY.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. I.

     _To the Editor of the 'Morning Post.'_

SIR,

Some little time ago you did me the favour of inserting a sonnet
expressive of the regret and indignation which, in common with others
all over these Islands, I felt at the proposal of a railway to extend
from Kendal to Low Wood, near the head of Windermere. The project was so
offensive to a large majority of the proprietors through whose lands the
line, after it came in view of the Lake, was to pass, that, for this
reason, and the avowed one of the heavy expense without which the
difficulties in the way could not be overcome, it has been partially
abandoned, and the terminus is now announced to be at a spot within a
mile of Bowness. But as no guarantee can be given that the project will
not hereafter be revived, and an attempt made to carry the line forward
through the vales of Ambleside and Grasmere, and as in one main
particular the case remains essentially the same, allow me to address
you upon certain points which merit more consideration than the
favourers of the scheme have yet given them. The matter, though
seemingly local, is really one in which all persons of taste must be
interested, and, therefore, I hope to be excused if I venture to treat
it at some length.

I shall barely touch upon the statistics of the question, leaving these
to the two adverse parties, who will lay their several statements before
the Board of Trade, which may possibly be induced to refer the matter to
the House of Commons; and, contemplating that possibility, I hope that
the observations I have to make may not be altogether without influence
upon the public, and upon individuals whose duty it may be to decide in
their place whether the proposed measure shall be referred to a
Committee of the House. Were the case before us an ordinary one, I
should reject such an attempt as presumptuous and futile; but it is not
only different from all others, but, in truth, peculiar.

In this district the manufactures are trifling; mines it has none, and
its quarries are either wrought out or superseded; the soil is light,
and the cultivateable parts of the country are very limited; so that it
has little to send out, and little has it also to receive. Summer
TOURISTS, (and the very word precludes the notion of a railway) it has
in abundance; but the inhabitants are so few and their intercourse with
other places so infrequent, that one daily coach, which could not be
kept going but through its connection with the Post-office, suffices for
three-fourths of the year along the line of country as far as Keswick.
The staple of the district is, in fact, its beauty and its character of
seclusion and retirement; and to these topics and to others connected
with them my remarks shall be confined.

The projectors have induced many to favour their schemes by declaring
that one of their main objects is to place the beauties of the Lake
district within easier reach of those who cannot afford to pay for
ordinary conveyances. Look at the facts. Railways are completed, which,
joined with others in rapid progress, will bring travellers who prefer
approaching by Ullswater to within four miles of that lake. The
Lancaster and Carlisle Railway will approach the town of Kendal, about
eight or nine miles from eminences that command the whole vale of
Windermere. The Lakes are therefore at present of very easy access for
_all_ persons; but if they be not made still more so, the poor, it is
said, will be wronged. Before this be admitted let the question be
fairly looked into, and its different bearings examined. No one can
assert that, if this intended mode of approach be not effected, anything
will be taken away that is actually possessed. The wrong, if any, must
lie in the unwarrantable obstruction of an attainable benefit. First,
then, let us consider the probable amount of that benefit.

Elaborate gardens, with topiary works, were in high request, even among
our remote ancestors, but the relish for choice and picturesque natural
_scenery_ (a poor and mean word which requires an apology, but will be
generally understood), is quite of recent origin. Our earlier
travellers--Ray, the naturalist, one of the first men of his age--Bishop
Burnet, and others who had crossed the Alps, or lived some time in
Switzerland, are silent upon the sublimity and beauty of those regions;
and Burnet even uses these words, speaking of the Grisons--'When they
have made up estates elsewhere they are glad to leave Italy and the best
parts of Germany, and to come and live among those mountains of which
the very sight is enough to fill a man with horror.' The accomplished
Evelyn, giving an account of his journey from Italy through the Alps,
dilates upon the terrible, the melancholy, and the uncomfortable; but,
till he comes to the fruitful country in the neighbourhood of Geneva,
not a syllable of delight or praise. In the _Sacra Telluris Theoria_ of
the other Burnet there is a passage--omitted, however, in his own
English translation of the work--in which he gives utterance to his
sensations, when, from a particular spot he beheld a tract of the Alps
rising before him on the one hand, and on the other the Mediterranean
Sea spread beneath him. Nothing can be worthier of the magnificent
appearances he describes than his language. In a noble strain also does
the Poet Gray address, in a Latin Ode, the _Religio loci_ at the Grande
Chartruise. But before his time, with the exception of the passage from
Thomas Burnet just alluded to, there is not, I believe, a single English
traveller whose published writings would disprove the assertion, that,
where precipitous rocks and mountains are mentioned at all, they are
spoken of as objects of dislike and fear, and not of admiration. Even
Gray himself, describing, in his Journal, the steeps at the entrance of
Borrowdale, expresses his terror in the language of Dante:--'Let us not
speak of them, but look and pass on.' In my youth, I lived some time in
the vale of Keswick, under the roof of a shrewd and sensible woman, who
more than once exclaimed in my hearing, 'Bless me! folk are always
talking about prospects: when I was young there was never sic a thing
neamed.' In fact, our ancestors, as every where appears, in choosing the
site of their houses, looked only at shelter and convenience, especially
of water, and often would place a barn or any other out-house directly
in front of their habitations, however beautiful the landscape which
their windows might otherwise have commanded. The first house that was
built in the Lake district for the sake of the beauty of the country
was the work of a Mr. English, who had travelled in Italy, and chose for
his site, some eighty years ago, the great island of Windermere; but it
was sold before his building was finished, and he showed how little he
was capable of appreciating the character of the situation by setting up
a length of high garden-wall, as exclusive as it was ugly, almost close
to the house. The nuisance was swept away when the late Mr. Curwen
became the owner of this favoured spot. Mr. English was followed by Mr.
Pocklington, a native of Nottinghamshire, who played strange pranks by
his buildings and plantations upon Vicar's Island, in Derwent-water,
which his admiration, such as it was, of the country, and probably a
wish to be a leader in a new fashion, had tempted him to purchase. But
what has all this to do with the subject?--Why, to show that a vivid
perception of romantic scenery is neither inherent in mankind, nor a
necessary consequence of even a comprehensive education. It is benignly
ordained that green fields, clear blue skies, running streams of pure
water, rich groves and woods, orchards, and all the ordinary varieties
of rural Nature, should find an easy way to the affections of all men,
and more or less so from early childhood till the senses are impaired by
old age and the sources of mere earthly enjoyment have in a great
measure failed. But a taste beyond this, however desirable it may be
that every one should possess it, is not to be implanted at once; it
must be gradually developed both in nations and individuals. Rocks and
mountains, torrents and wide-spread waters, and all those features of
Nature which go to the composition of such scenes as this part of
England is distinguished for, cannot, in their finer relations to the
human mind, be comprehended, or even very imperfectly conceived, without
processes of culture or opportunities of observation in some degree
habitual. In the eye of thousands and tens of thousands, a rich meadow,
with fat cattle grazing upon it, or the sight of what they would call a
heavy crop of corn, is worth all that the Alps and Pyrenees in their
utmost grandeur and beauty could show to them; and, notwithstanding the
grateful influence, as we have observed, of ordinary Nature and the
productions of the fields, it is noticeable what trifling conventional
prepossessions will, in common minds, not only preclude pleasure from
the sight of natural beauty, but will even turn it into an object of
disgust. 'If I had to do with this garden,' said a respectable person,
one of my neighbours, 'I would sweep away all the black and dirty stuff
from that wall.' The wall was backed by a bank of earth, and was
exquisitely decorated with ivy, flowers, moss, and ferns, such as grow
of themselves in like places; but the mere notion of fitness associated
with a trim garden-wall prevented, in this instance, all sense of the
spontaneous bounty and delicate care of Nature. In the midst of a small
pleasure-ground, immediately below my house, rises a detached rock,
equally remarkable for the beauty of its form, the ancient oaks that
grow out of it, and the flowers and shrubs which adorn it. 'What a nice
place would this be,' said a Manchester tradesman, pointing to the rock,
'if that ugly lump were but out of the way.' Men as little advanced in
the pleasure which such objects give to others are so far from being
rare, that they may be said fairly to represent a large majority of
mankind. This is a fact, and none but the deceiver and the willingly
deceived can be offended by its being stated. But as a more susceptible
taste is undoubtedly a great acquisition, and has been spreading among
us for some years, the question is, what means are most likely to be
beneficial in extending its operation? Surely that good is not to be
obtained by transferring at once uneducated persons in large bodies to
particular spots, where the combinations of natural objects are such as
would afford the greatest pleasure to those who have been in the habit
of observing and studying the peculiar character of such scenes, and how
they differ one from another. Instead of tempting artisans and
labourers, and the humbler classes of shopkeepers, to ramble to a
distance, let us rather look with lively sympathy upon persons in that
condition, when, upon a holiday, or on the Sunday, after having attended
divine worship, they make little excursions with their wives and
children among neighbouring fields, whither the whole of each family
might stroll, or be conveyed at much less cost than would be required to
take a single individual of the number to the shores of Windermere by
the cheapest conveyance. It is in some such way as this only, that
persons who must labour daily with their hands for bread in large towns,
or are subject to confinement through the week, can be trained to a
profitable intercourse with Nature where she is the most distinguished
by the majesty and sublimity of her forms.

For further illustration of the subject, turn to what we know of a man
of extraordinary genius, who was bred to hard labour in agricultural
employments, Burns, the poet. When he had become distinguished by the
publication of a volume of verses, and was enabled to travel by the
profit his poems brought him, he made a tour, in the course of which, as
his companion, Dr. Adair, tells us, he visited scenes inferior to none
in Scotland in beauty, sublimity, and romantic interest; and the Doctor
having noticed, with other companions, that he seemed little moved upon
one occasion by the sight of such a scene, says--'I doubt if he had much
taste for the picturesque.' The personal testimony, however, upon this
point is conflicting; but when Dr. Currie refers to certain local poems
as decisive proofs that Burns' fellow-traveller was mistaken, the
biographer is surely unfortunate. How vague and tame are the poet's
expressions in those few local poems, compared with his language when he
is describing objects with which his position in life allowed him to be
familiar! It appears, both from what his works contain, and from what is
not to be found in them, that, sensitive as they abundantly prove his
mind to have been in its intercourse with common rural images, and with
the general powers of Nature exhibited in storm and in stillness, in
light or darkness, and in the various aspects of the seasons, he was
little affected by the sight of one spot in preference to another,
unless where it derived an interest from history, tradition, or local
associations. He lived many years in Nithsdale, where he was in daily
sight of Skiddaw, yet he never crossed the Solway for a better
acquaintance with that mountain; and I am persuaded that, if he had been
induced to ramble among our Lakes, by that time sufficiently celebrated,
he would have seldom been more excited than by some ordinary Scottish
stream or hill with a tradition attached to it, or which had been the
scene of a favourite ballad or love song. If all this be truly said of
such a man, and the like cannot be denied of the eminent individuals
before named, who to great natural talents added the accomplishments of
scholarship or science, then what ground is there for maintaining that
the poor are treated with disrespect, or wrong done to them or any class
of visitants, if we be reluctant to introduce a railway into this
country for the sake of lessening, by eight or nine miles only, the
fatigue or expense of their journey to Windermere?--And wherever any
one among the labouring classes has made even an approach to the
sensibility which drew a lamentation from Burns when he had uprooted a
daisy with his plough, and caused him to turn the 'weeder-clips aside'
from the thistle, and spare 'the symbol dear' of his country, then
surely such a one, could he afford by any means to travel as far as
Kendal, would not grudge a two hours' walk across the skirts of the
beautiful country that he was desirous of visiting.

The wide-spread waters of these regions are in their nature peaceful; so
are the-steep mountains and the rocky glens; nor can they be profitably
enjoyed but by a mind disposed to peace. Go to a pantomime, a farce, or
a puppet-show, if you want noisy pleasure--the crowd of spectators who
partake your enjoyment will, by their presence and acclamations, enhance
it; but may those who have given proof that they prefer other
gratifications continue to be safe from the molestation of cheap trains
pouring out their hundreds at a time along the margin of Windermere; nor
let any one be liable to the charge of being selfishly disregardful of
the poor, and their innocent and salutary enjoyments, if he does not
congratulate himself upon the especial benefit which would thus be
conferred on such a concourse.

    O, Nature, a' thy shows an' forms,
    To feeling pensive hearts hae charms!

So exclaimed the Ayrshire ploughman, speaking of ordinary rural Nature
under the varying influences of the seasons, and the sentiment has found
an echo in the bosoms of thousands in as humble a condition as he
himself was when he gave vent to it. But then they were feeling, pensive
hearts; men who would be among the first to lament the facility with
which they had approached this region, by a sacrifice of so much of its
quiet and beauty, as, from the intrusion of a railway, would be
inseparable. What can, in truth, be more absurd, than that either rich
or poor should be spared the trouble of travelling by the high roads
over so short a space, according to their respective means, if the
unavoidable consequence must be a great disturbance of the retirement,
and in many places a destruction of the beauty of the country, which the
parties are come in search of? Would not this be pretty much like the
child's cutting up his drum to learn where the sound came from?

Having, I trust, given sufficient reason for the belief that the
imperfectly educated classes are not likely to draw much good from rare
visits to the Lakes performed in this way, and surely on their own
account it is not desirable that the visits should be frequent, let us
glance at the mischief which such facilities would certainly produce.
The directors of railway companies are always ready to devise or
encourage entertainments for tempting the humbler classes to leave their
homes. Accordingly, for the profit of the shareholders and that of the
lower class of innkeepers, we should have wrestling matches, horse and
boat races without number, and pot-houses and beer-shops would keep pace
with these excitements and recreations, most of which might too easily
be had elsewhere. The injury which would thus be done to morals, both
among this influx of strangers and the lower class of inhabitants, is
obvious; and, supposing such extraordinary temptations not to be held
out, there cannot be a doubt that the Sabbath day in the towns of
Bowness and Ambleside, and other parts of the district, would be subject
to much additional desecration.

Whatever comes of the scheme which we have endeavoured to
discountenance, the charge against its opponents of being selfishly
regardless of the poor, ought to cease. The cry has been raised and kept
up by three classes of persons--they who wish to bring into discredit
all such as stand in the way of their gains or gambling speculations;
they who are dazzled by the application of physical science to the
useful arts, and indiscriminately applaud what they call the spirit of
the age as manifested in this way; and, lastly, those persons who are
ever ready to step forward in what appears to them to be the cause of
the poor, but not always with becoming attention to particulars. I am
well aware that upon the first class what has been said will be of no
avail, but upon the two latter some impression will, I trust, be made.

To conclude. The railway power, we know well, will not admit of being
materially counteracted by sentiment; and who would wish it where large
towns are connected, and the interests of trade and agriculture are
substantially promoted, by such mode of intercommunication? But be it
remembered, that this case is, as has been said before, a peculiar one,
and that the staple of the country is its beauty and its character of
retirement. Let then the beauty be undisfigured and the retirement
unviolated, unless there be reason for believing that rights and
interests of a higher kind and more apparent than those which have been
urged in behalf of the projected intrusion will compensate the
sacrifice. Thanking you for the judicious observations that have
appeared in your paper upon the subject of railways,

     I remain, Sir,
        Your obliged,
            WM. WORDSWORTH.

Rydal Mount, Dec. 9, 1844.

NOTE.--To the instances named in this letter of the indifference even of
men of genius to the sublime forms of Nature in mountainous districts,
the author of the interesting Essays, in the _Morning Post_, entitled
Table Talk has justly added Goldsmith, and I give the passage in his own
words.

'The simple and gentle-hearted Goldsmith, who had an exquisite sense of
rural beauty in the familiar forms of hill and dale, and meadows with
their hawthorn-scented hedges, does not seem to have dreamt of any such
thing as beauty in the Swiss Alps, though he traversed them on foot, and
had therefore the best opportunities of observing them. In his poem "The
Traveller," he describes the Swiss as loving their mountain homes, not
by reason of the romantic beauty of the situation, but in spite of the
miserable character of the soil, and the stormy horrors of their
mountain steeps--

                      Turn we to survey
    Where rougher climes a nobler race display,
    Where the bleak Swiss their stormy mansion tread,
    And force a churlish soil for scanty bread.
    No produce here the barren hills afford,
    But man and steel, the soldier and his sword:
    No vernal blooms their torpid rocks array,
    But winter lingering chills the lap of May;
    No Zephyr fondly sues the mountain's breast,
    But meteors glare and stormy glooms invest.
    Yet still, _even here_, content can spread a charm,
    Redress the clime, and all its rage disarm.'

In the same Essay, (December 18th, 1844,) are many observations
judiciously bearing upon the true character of this and similar
projects.


No. II.

_To the Editor of the 'Morning Post.'_

Sir,

As you obligingly found space in your journal for observations of mine
upon the intended Kendal and Windermere Railway, I venture to send you
some further remarks upon the same subject. The scope of the main
argument, it will be recollected, was to prove that the perception of
what has acquired the name of picturesque and romantic scenery is so far
from being intuitive, that it can be produced only by a slow and gradual
process of culture; and to show, as a consequence, that the humbler
ranks of society are not, and cannot be, in a state to gain material
benefit from a more speedy access than they now have to this beautiful
region. Some of our opponents dissent from this latter proposition,
though the most judicious of them readily admit the former; but then,
overlooking not only positive assertions, but reasons carefully given,
they say, 'As you allow that a more comprehensive taste is desirable,
you ought to side with us;' and they illustrate their position, by
reference to the British Museum and National Picture Gallery. 'There,'
they add, 'thanks to the easy entrance now granted, numbers are seen,
indicating by their dress and appearance their humble condition, who,
when admitted for the first time, stare vacantly around them, so that
one is inclined to ask what brought them hither? But an impression is
made, something gained which may induce them to repeat the visit until
light breaks in upon them, and they take an intelligent interest in what
they behold.' Persons who talk thus forget that, to produce such an
improvement, frequent access at small cost of time and labour is
indispensable. Manchester lies, perhaps, within eight hours' railway
distance of London; but surely no one would advise that Manchester
operatives should contract a habit of running to and fro between that
town and London, for the sake of forming an intimacy with the British
Museum and National Gallery? No, no; little would all but a very few
gain from the opportunities which, consistently with common sense,
could be afforded them for such expeditions. Nor would it fare better
with them in respect of trips to the lake district; an assertion, the
truth of which no one can doubt, who has learned by experience how many
men of the same or higher rank, living from their birth in this very
region, are indifferent to those objects around them in which a
cultivated taste takes so much pleasure. I should not have detained the
reader so long upon this point, had I not heard (glad tidings for the
directors and traffickers in shares!) that among the affluent and
benevolent manufacturers of Yorkshire and Lancashire are some who
already entertain the thought of sending, at their own expense, large
bodies of their workmen, by railway, to the banks of Windermere. Surely
those gentlemen will think a little more before they put such a scheme
into practice. The rich man cannot benefit the poor, nor the superior
the inferior, by anything that degrades him. Packing off men after this
fashion, for holiday entertainment, is, in fact, treating them like
children. They go at the will of their master, and must return at the
same, or they will be dealt with as transgressors.

A poor man, speaking of his son, whose time of service in the army was
expired, once said to me, (the reader will be startled at the
expression, and I, indeed, was greatly shocked by it), 'I am glad he has
done with that _mean_ way of life.' But I soon gathered what was at the
bottom of the feeling. The father overlooked all the glory that attaches
to the character of a British soldier, in the consciousness that his
son's will must have been in so great a degree subject to that of
others. The poor man felt where the true dignity of his species lay,
namely, in a just proportion between actions governed by a man's own
inclinations and those of other men; but, according to the father's
notion, that proportion did not exist in the course of life from which
his son had been released. Had the old man known from experience the
degree of liberty allowed to the common soldier, and the moral effect of
the obedience required, he would have thought differently, and had he
been capable of extending his views, he would have felt how much of the
best and noblest part of our civic spirit was owing to our military and
naval institutions, and that perhaps our very existence as a free people
had by them been maintained. This extreme instance has been adduced to
show how deeply seated in the minds of Englishmen is their sense of
personal independence. Master-manufacturers ought never to lose sight of
this truth. Let them consent to a Ten Hours' Bill, with little or, if
possible, no diminution of wages, and the necessaries of life being more
easily procured, the mind will develope itself accordingly, and each
individual would be more at liberty to make at his own cost excursions
in any direction which might be most inviting to him. There would then
be no need for their masters sending them in droves scores of miles from
their homes and families to the borders of Windermere, or anywhere else.
Consider also the state of the lake district; and look, in the first
place, at the little town of Bowness, in the event of such railway
inundations. What would become of it in this, not the Retreat, but the
Advance, of the Ten Thousand? Leeds, I am told, has sent as many at once
to Scarborough. We should have the whole of Lancashire, and no small
part of Yorkshire, pouring in upon us to meet the men of Durham, and the
borderers from Cumberland and Northumberland. Alas, alas, if the lakes
are to pay this penalty for their own attractions!

    --Vane could tell what ills from beauty spring,
    And Sedley cursed the form that pleased a king.

The fear of adding to the length of my last long letter prevented me
from entering into details upon private and personal feelings among the
residents, who have cause to lament the threatened intrusion. These are
not matters to be brought before a Board of Trade, though I trust there
will always be of that board members who know well that as we do 'not
live by bread alone,' so neither do we live by political economy alone.
Of the present Board I would gladly believe there is not one who, if his
duty allowed it, would not be influenced by considerations of what may
be felt by a gallant officer now serving on the coast of South America,
when he shall learn that the nuisance, though not intended actually to
enter his property, will send its omnibuses, as fast as they can drive,
within a few yards of his modest abode, which he built upon a small
domain purchased at a price greatly enhanced by the privacy and beauty
of the situation. Professor Wilson (him I take the liberty to name),
though a native of Scotland, and familiar with the grandeur of his own
country, could not resist the temptation of settling long ago among our
mountains. The place which his public duties have compelled him to quit
as a residence, and may compel him to part with, is probably dearer to
him than any spot upon earth. The reader should be informed with what
respect he has been treated. Engineer agents, to his astonishment, came
and intruded with their measuring instruments, upon his garden. He saw
them; and who will not admire the patience that kept his hands from
their shoulders? I must stop.

But with the fear before me of the line being carried; at a day not
distant, through the whole breadth of the district, I could dwell, with
much concern for other residents, upon the condition which they would be
in if that outrage should be committed; nor ought it to be deemed
impertinent were I to recommend this point to the especial regard of
Members of Parliament who may have to decide upon the question. The two
Houses of Legislature have frequently shown themselves not unmindful of
private feeling in these matters. They have, in some cases, been induced
to spare parks and pleasure grounds. But along the great railway lines
these are of rare occurrence. They are but a part, and a small part;
here it is far otherwise. Among the ancient inheritances of the yeomen,
surely worthy of high respect, are interspersed through the entire
district villas, most of them with such small domains attached that the
occupants would be hardly less annoyed by a railway passing through
their neighbour's ground than through their own. And it would be
unpardonable not to advert to the effect of this measure on the
interests of the very poor in this locality. With the town of Bowness I
have no _minute_ acquaintance; but of Ambleside, Grasmere, and the
neighbourhood, I can testify from long experience, that they have been
favoured by the residence of a gentry whose love of retirement has been
a blessing to these vales; for their families have ministered, and still
minister, to the temporal and spiritual necessities of the poor, and
have personally superintended the education of the children in a degree
which does those benefactors the highest honour, and which is, I trust,
gratefully acknowledged in the hearts of all whom they have relieved,
employed, and taught. Many of those friends of our poor would quit this
country if the apprehended change were realised, and would be succeeded
by strangers not linked to the neighbourhood, but flitting to and fro
between their fancy villas and the homes where their wealth was
accumulated and accumulating by trade and manufactures. It is obvious
that persons, so unsettled, whatever might be their good wishes and
readiness to part with money for charitable purposes, would ill supply
the loss of the inhabitants who had been driven away.

It will be felt by those who think with me upon this occasion that I
have been writing on behalf of a social condition which no one who is
competent to judge of it will be willing to subvert, and that I have
been endeavouring to support moral sentiments and intellectual pleasures
of a high order against an enmity which seems growing more and more
formidable every day; I mean 'Utilitarianism,' serving as a mask for
cupidity and gambling speculations. My business with this evil lies in
its reckless mode of action by Railways, now its favourite instruments.
Upon good authority I have been told that there was lately an intention
of driving one of these pests, as they are likely too often to prove,
through a part of the magnificent ruins of Furness Abbey--an outrage
which was prevented by some one pointing out how easily a deviation
might be made; and the hint produced its due effect upon the engineer.

Sacred as that relic of the devotion of our ancestors deserves to be
kept, there are temples of Nature, temples built by the Almighty, which
have a still higher claim to be left unviolated. Almost every reach of
the winding vales in this district might once have presented itself to a
man of imagination and feeling under that aspect, or, as the Vale of
Grasmere appeared to the Poet Gray more than seventy years ago. 'No
flaring gentleman's-house,' says he, 'nor garden-walls break in upon the
repose of this little unsuspected _paradise_, but all is peace,' &c.,
&c. Were the Poet now living, how would he have lamented the probable
intrusion of a railway with its scarifications, its intersections, its
noisy machinery, its smoke, and swarms of pleasure-hunters, most of them
thinking that they do not fly fast enough through the country which they
have come to see. Even a broad highway may in some places greatly impair
the characteristic beauty of the country, as will be readily
acknowledged by those who remember what the Lake of Grasmere was before
the new road that runs along its eastern margin had been constructed.

                    Quanto praestantias esset
    Numen aquae viridi si margina clauderet undas
    Herba--

As it once was, and fringed with wood, instead of the breastwork of bare
wall that now confines it. In the same manner has the beauty, and still
more the sublimity of many Passes in the Alps been injuriously affected.
Will the reader excuse a quotation from a MS. poem in which I attempted
to describe the impression made upon my mind by the descent towards
Italy along the Simplon before the new military road had taken the place
of the old muleteer track with its primitive simplicities?

                            Brook and road
    Were fellow-travellers in this gloomy Pass,
    And with them did we journey several hours
    At a slow step. The immeasurable height
    Of woods decaying, never to be decayed,
    The stationary blasts of waterfalls.
    And in the narrow rent, at every turn,
    Winds thwarting winds bewildered and forlorn,
    The torrents shooting from the clear blue sky,
    The rocks that muttered close upon our ears,
    Black drizzling crags that spake by the way-side
    As if a voice were in them, the sick sight
    And giddy prospect of the raving stream,
    The unfettered clouds and region of the heavens,
    Tumult and peace, the darkness and the light,
    Were all like workings of one mind, the features
    Of the same face, blossoms upon one tree,
    Characters of the great Apocalypse,
    The types and symbols of Eternity,
    Of first, and last, and midst, and without end.
                                                   1799.

Thirty years afterwards I crossed the Alps by the same Pass: and what
had become of the forms and powers to which I had been indebted for
those emotions? Many of them remained of course undestroyed and
indestructible. But, though the road and torrent continued to run
parallel to each other, their fellowship was put an end to. The stream
had dwindled into comparative insignificance, so much had Art interfered
with and taken the lead of Nature; and although the utility of the new
work, as facilitating the intercourse of great nations, was readily
acquiesced in, and the workmanship, in some places, could not but excite
admiration, it was impossible to suppress regret for what had vanished
for ever. The oratories heretofore not unfrequently met with, on a road
still somewhat perilous, were gone; the simple and rude bridges swept
away; and instead of travellers proceeding, with leisure to observe and
feel, were pilgrims of fashion hurried along in their carriages, not a
few of them perhaps discussing the merits of 'the last new Novel,' or
poring over their Guide-books, or fast asleep. Similar remarks might be
applied to the mountainous country of Wales; but there too, the plea of
utility, especially as expediting the communication between England and
Ireland, more than justifies the labours of the Engineer. Not so would
it be with the Lake District. A railroad is already planned along the
sea coast, and another from Lancaster to Carlisle is in great
forwardness: an intermediate one is therefore, to say the least of it,
superfluous. Once for all let me declare that it is not against Railways
but against the abuse of them that I am contending.

How far I am from undervaluing the benefit to be expected from railways
in their legitimate application will appear from the following lines
published in 1837, and composed some years earlier.

STEAMBOATS AND RAILWAYS.

    Motions and Means, on sea, on land at war
    With old poetic feeling, not for this
    Shall ye, by poets even, be judged amiss!
    Nor shall your presence, howsoe'er it mar
    The loveliness of Nature, prove a bar
    To the mind's gaining that prophetic sense
    Of future good, that point of vision, whence
    May be discovered what in soul ye are.
    In spite of all that Beauty must disown
    In your harsh features, Nature doth embrace
    Her lawful offspring in man's Art; and Time,
    Pleased with your triumphs o'er his brother Space,
    Accepts from your bold hand the proffered crown
    Of hope, and welcomes you with cheer sublime.

I have now done with the subject. The time of life at which I have
arrived may, I trust, if nothing else will, guard me from the imputation
of having written from any selfish interests, or from fear of
disturbance which a railway might cause to myself. If gratitude for what
repose and quiet in a district hitherto, for the most part, not
disfigured but beautified by human hands, have done for me through the
course of a long life, and hope that others might hereafter be benefited
in the same manner and in the same country, _be_ selfishness, then,
indeed, but not otherwise, I plead guilty to the charge. Nor have I
opposed this undertaking on account of the inhabitants of the district
_merely_, but, as hath been intimated, for the sake of every one,
however humble his condition, who coming hither shall bring with him an
eye to perceive, and a heart to feel and worthily enjoy. And as for
holiday pastimes, if a scene is to be chosen suitable to them for
persons thronging from a distance, it may be found elsewhere at less
cost of every kind. But, in fact, we have too much hurrying about in
these islands; much for idle pleasure, and more from over activity in
the pursuit of wealth, without regard to the good or happiness of
others.

    Proud were ye, Mountains, when, in times of old,
    Your patriot sons, to stem invasive war,
    Intrenched your brows; ye gloried in each scar:
    Now, for your shame, a Power, the Thirst of Gold,
    That rules o'er Britain like a baneful star,
    Wills that your peace, your beauty, shall be sold,
    And clear way made for her triumphal car
    Through the beloved retreats your arms enfold!
    Heard YE that Whistle? As her long-linked Train
    Swept onwards, did the vision cross your view?
    Yes, ye were startled;--and, in balance true,
    Weighing the mischief with the promised gain,
    Mountains, and Vales, and Floods, I call on you
    To share the passion of a just disdain.

                  WILLIAM WORDSWORTH.


