


THE ADVENTURES OF ULYSSES

BY

CHARLES LAMB




PREFACE


This work is designed as a supplement to the Adventures of Telemachus. It
treats of the conduct and sufferings of Ulysses, the father of Telemachus.
The picture which it exhibits is that of a brave man struggling with
adversity; by a wise use of events, and with an inimitable presence of
mind under difficulties, forcing out a way for himself through the
severest trials to which human life can be exposed; with enemies natural
and preternatural surrounding him on all sides. The agents in this tale,
besides men and women, are giants, enchanters, sirens: things which denote
external force or internal temptations, the twofold danger which a wise
fortitude must expect to encounter in its course through this world. The
fictions contained in it will be found to comprehend some of the most
admired inventions of Grecian mythology.

The groundwork of the story is as old as the Odyssey, but the moral and
the coloring are comparatively modern. By avoiding the prolixity which
marks the speeches and the descriptions in Homer, I have gained a rapidity
to the narration which I hope will make it more attractive and give it
more the air of a romance to young readers, though I am sensible that by
the curtailment I have sacrificed in many places the manners to the
passion, the subordinate characteristics to the essential interest of the
story. The attempt is not to be considered as seeking a comparison with
any of the direct translations of the Odyssey, either in prose or verse,
though if I were to state the obligations which I have had to one obsolete
version, [Footnote: The translation of Homer by Chapman in the reign of
James I.] I should run the hazard of depriving myself of the very slender
degree of reputation which I could hope to acquire from a trifle like the
present undertaking.




CONTENTS


CHAPTER ONE

The Cicons.--The Fruit of the Lotus-tree.--Polyphemus and the Cyclops.--
The Kingdom of the Winds, and God Aeolus's Fatal Present.--The
Laestrygonian Man-eaters.

CHAPTER TWO

The House of Circe.--Men changed into Beasts.--The Voyage to Hell.--The
Banquet of the Dead.

CHAPTER THREE

The Song of the Sirens.--Scylla and Charybdis.--The Oxen of the Sun.--The
Judgment.--The Crew Killed by Lightning.

CHAPTER FOUR

The Island of Calypso.--Immortality Refused.

CHAPTER FIVE

The Tempest.--The Sea-bird's Gift.--The Escape by Swimming.--The Sleep in
the Woods.

CHAPTER SIX

The Princess Nausicaa.--The Washing.--The Game with the Ball.--The Court
of Phaeacia and King Alcinous.

CHAPTER SEVEN

The Songs of Demodocus--The Convoy Home.--The Manners--Transformed to
Stone--The Young Shepherd.

CHAPTER EIGHT

The Change from a King to a Beggar.--Eumaeus and the Herdsmen--Telemachus.

CHAPTER NINE

The Queen's Suitors--The Battle of the Beggars.--The Armour Taken Down.--
The Meeting with Penelope.

CHAPTER TEN

The Madness from Above--The Bow of Ulysses.--The Slaughter.--The
Conclusion.




ILLUSTRATIONS

"'Cyclop,' he said, 'take a bowl of wine from the hand of your guest'"

"Out rushed with mighty noise all the winds"

"And straight they were transformed into swine"

"'Who or what manner of man art thou?'"

"And the dead came to his banquet"

"He would have broken his bonds to rush after them"

"Nine days was he floating about with all the motions of the sea"

"Took a last leave of her and of her nymphs"

"And Nausicaa joined them in a game with the ball"

"He gave them a brief relation of all the adventures that had befallen
him"

"Consulting how they might with safety bring about his restoration"

"'But such as your fare is, eat it, and be welcome'"

"'I am no more but thy father: I am even he'"

"But the greater part reviled him and bade him begone"

"When the maids were lighting the queen through a stately gallery"

"Rose in a mass to overwhelm and crush those two"




THE ADVENTURES OF ULYSSES




CHAPTER ONE

The Cicons.--The Fruit of the Lotos-tree.--Polyphemus and the Cyclops.--
The Kingdom of the Winds, and God Aeolus's Fatal Present.--The
Laestrygonian Man-eaters.


This history tells of the wanderings of Ulysses and his followers in their
return from Troy, after the destruction of that famous city of Asia by the
Grecians. He was inflamed with a desire of seeing again, after a ten
years' absence, his wife and native country, Ithaca. He was king of a
barren spot, and a poor country in comparison of the fruitful plains of
Asia, which he was leaving, or the wealthy kingdoms which he touched upon
in his return; yet, wherever he came, he could never see a soil which
appeared in his eyes half so sweet or desirable as his country earth. This
made him refuse the offers of the goddess Calypso to stay with her, and
partake of her immortality in the delightful island; and this gave him
strength to break from the enchantments of Circe, the daughter of the Sun.

From Troy, ill winds cast Ulysses and his fleet upon the coast of the
Cicons, a people hostile to the Grecians. Landing his forces, he laid
siege to their chief city, Ismarus, which he took, and with it much spoil,
and slew many people. But success proved fatal to him; for his soldiers,
elated with the spoil, and the good store of provisions which they found
in that place, fell to eating and drinking, forgetful of their safety,
till the Cicons, who inhabited the coast, had time to assemble their
friends and allies from the interior; who, mustering in prodigious force,
set upon the Grecians, while they negligently revelled and feasted, and
slew many of them, and recovered the spoil. They, dispirited and thinned
in their numbers, with difficulty made their retreat good to the ships.

Thence they set sail, sad at heart, yet something cheered that with such
fearful odds against them they had not all been utterly destroyed. A
dreadful tempest ensued, which for two nights and two days tossed them
about, but the third day the weather cleared, and they had hopes of a
favourable gale to carry them to Ithaca; but, as they doubled the Cape of
Malea, suddenly a north wind arising drove them back as far as Cythera.
After that, for the space of nine days, contrary winds continued to drive
them in an opposite direction to the point to which they were bound, and
the tenth day they put in at a shore where a race of men dwell that are
sustained by the fruit of the lotos-tree. Here Ulysses sent some of his
men to land for fresh water, who were met by certain of the inhabitants,
that gave them some of their country food to eat--not with any ill
intention towards them, though in the event it proved pernicious; for,
having eaten of this fruit, so pleasant it proved to their appetite that
they in a minute quite forgot all thoughts of home, or of their
countrymen, or of ever returning back to the ships to give an account of
what sort of inhabitants dwelt there, but they would needs stay and live
there among them, and eat of that precious food forever; and when Ulysses
sent other of his men to look for them, and to bring them back by force,
they strove, and wept, and would not leave their food for heaven itself,
so much the pleasure of that enchanting fruit had bewitched them. But
Ulysses caused them to be bound hand and foot, and cast under the hatches;
and set sail with all possible speed from that baneful coast, lest others
after them might taste the lotos, which had such strange qualities to make
men forget their native country and the thoughts of home.
